\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@c 
@c NAME 
@c ipe.texi
@c 
@c PURPOSE
@c This file is a GNU 'texinfo' file
@c (https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo) used to document the
@c 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) Emacs (https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs)
@c package.
@c
@c AUTHOR
@c Brian Kavanagh
@c 
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------

@settitle Insert Pair Edit (ipe) Help 1.1

@c *******************************************************************
@c Copyright
@c *******************************************************************
@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2024 Brian Kavanagh

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* ipe: (ipe).	Insert Pair Edit (ipe).
@end direntry

@c *******************************************************************
@titlepage
@c *******************************************************************
@title Insert Pair Edit (ipe) Help 1.1
@subtitle A GNU Emacs Package.
@author Brian Kavanagh

@c *******************************************************************
@c Copyright Page.
@c *******************************************************************

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c *******************************************************************
@contents
@c *******************************************************************

@c *******************************************************************
@c Top Node
@c *******************************************************************

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Insert Pair Edit (ipe)

This documentation describes the 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe)
@strong{Emacs} package.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::                     An overview of the 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) package.
* Installation::                 How to install the 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) package.
* Basic Usage::                  The `ipe-insert-pair-edit' command.
* Basic Mode Key Bindings::      Basic `ipe-edit-mode' key bindings.
* Other Major Commands::         Other major `ipe-insert-pair-edit-*' commands. 
* Customization::                The `ipe' customization group.
* Other ipe-edit-mode Commands:: Other `ipe-edit-mode' commands.
* Other Features::               Other `ipe' / `ipe-edit-mode' features.
* Development::                  Documentation for developers.
* Index::                        Complete index.
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Overview
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Overview
@cindex Overview

At its simplest, the 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) package is an
@strong{Emacs} package that just supplies a command,
@command{ipe-insert-pair-edit}.  This command can be used to position
and insert two pieces of text into an @strong{Emacs} buffer: an
@sc{OPEN} string, and a @sc{CLOSE} string. (Or, as it is named within
this package, a `@sc{PAIR}'.)

For example, the @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command can be used to
position and insert an open parenthesis ``('', and, a close parenthesis
``)'', around a given piece of text.

The particular @sc{PAIR} to be inserted by the
@command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command is identified by a customizable
@sc{MNEMONIC}, (usually a single character) which is entered into the
@strong{Emacs} @emph{minibuffer} after running the
@command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command, at the ``Insert Pair: ''
prompt.

Once identified by the @sc{MNEMONIC}, this @sc{PAIR} is displayed
within the current buffer (as overlays) around a @emph{lexical unit}
surrounding POINT, and these overlays can then be moved about the
buffer (using a set of pre-configured movement keys) to visually
define the position at which the @sc{PAIR} is to be inserted into the
buffer.

The 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) package offers features to:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Customize the @sc{PAIR}s and @sc{MNEMONIC}s used.
@item
Define @emph{mode-specific} @sc{PAIR}s.
@item
Define the @emph{lexical unit} used for initial positioning and
initial movement of @sc{PAIR}s.
@item
Update / Delete / Replace @emph{existing} @sc{PAIR}s.
@item
Search for @sc{PAIR}s.
@item
Handle the editing / movement of multiple @sc{PAIR}s at once.
@item
Escape specific strings enclosed by a @sc{PAIR}.
@item
Indent the intervening lines within a @sc{PAIR}.
@item
Insert prefix strings (@sc{INFIX}es) at the beginning of intervening
lines within a @sc{PAIR}.
@item
Edit the text enclosed within the @sc{PAIR}.
@item
Re-position @sc{POINT} and @sc{MARK} on insert of a @sc{PAIR}.
@end itemize

@menu
* Expected Usage::
@end menu

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Expected Usage
@c --------------------------------------------------------------------

@section Expected Usage
@cindex Expected Usage

One target use for the functionality supplied by the 'Insert Pair
Edit' (ipe) package is @emph{marking up} text.

For example:

@itemize @bullet
@item  
Binding a set of HTML opening and closing tags:

@example
e.g.
  @sc{MNEMONIC}: "1"  @sc{OPEN}: "<h1>"     @sc{CLOSE}: "</h1>"
  @sc{MNEMONIC}: "e"  @sc{OPEN}: "<em>"     @sc{CLOSE}: "</em>"
  @sc{MNEMONIC}: "s"  @sc{OPEN}: "<strong>" @sc{CLOSE}: "</strong>"
  etc...
@end example

to a @command{html-mode}, and using the @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit}
command to add / edit these tags around existing text within a
@code{.html} file.

@item
Binding a set of opening and closing strings representing
@emph{markdown}:

@example
e.g.
  @sc{MNEMONIC}: "1"  @sc{OPEN}: "#"   @sc{CLOSE}: "#"
  @sc{MNEMONIC}: "*"  @sc{OPEN}: "**"  @sc{CLOSE}: "**"
  @sc{MNEMONIC}: "_"  @sc{OPEN}: "_"   @sc{CLOSE}: "_"
  etc...
@end example

to a @command{markdown-mode}, and using the
@command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} to add / edit these tags around
existing text within a @code{.md} file.
@end itemize

Another target use for this functionality is the addition of paired
programming constructs within a programming mode:

For example:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Binding language specific paired quotes / keywords / comments:

@example
e.g.
  @sc{MNEMONIC}: "/"  @sc{OPEN}: "/*"   @sc{CLOSE}: "*/"   @sc{INFIX}: "**"
  @sc{MNEMONIC}: "d"  @sc{OPEN}: "/**"  @sc{CLOSE}: " */"  @sc{INFIX}: " * "
  @sc{MNEMONIC}: ";"  @sc{OPEN}: "// "  @sc{CLOSE}: ""     @sc{INFIX}: "// "
  etc...
@end example

and using the @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command to accelerate the
process of writing in the given language.
@end itemize

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Installation
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Installation
@cindex Installation

To install 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe), either:

@itemize
@item
Download the @command{ipe} package from @emph{MELPA}:

@example
(require 'package)
(add-to-list 'package-archives '("melpa" . "http://melpa.org/packages/"))
(package-initialize)
(package-install 'ipe)
@end example

@item
Or, download the @command{ipe} package from: 

@url{https://github.com/BriansEmacs/insert-pair-edit.el}

And add the downloaded package to the @command{'load-path}:

@example
(add-to-list 'load-path "<path-to-ipe-download-dir>") 
(add-to-list 'load-path "<path-to-ipe-download-dir>/modes") 
@end example
@end itemize

Then, add the following to your @code{.emacs} file:

@example
(require 'ipe)
@end example

Add your preferred key-binding for the @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit}
command. 

For example, to bind @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} to @key{META} +
@key{(}:

@example
(global-set-key (kbd "M-(") 'ipe-insert-pair-edit)        
@end example

You may also want to:

@itemize
@item
Enable the 'Insert Pair Edit' ``Pairs'' menu by adding the following
to your @command{.emacs} file.

@example
(customize-save-variable 'ipe-menu-support-p t)
@end example

@item
Add shortcut keybindings for the 'other' Major `ipe' commands:

For example:

@example
(global-set-key (kbd "A-(") 'ipe-insert-pair-edit-update)
(global-set-key (kbd "H-(") 'ipe-insert-pair-edit-delete)
(global-set-key (kbd "s-(") 'ipe-insert-pair-edit-replace)
@end example

@item
Load the 'example' modal PAIR mappings:

@example
(require 'ipe-html-mode)
(require 'ipe-markdown-mode)
(require 'ipe-textinfo-mode)
@end example
@end itemize

To configure the package:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Run the command:

@example
@key{M-x} customize-group @key{RET}
@end example

And when prompted for a group via:

@example
Customize-Group:
@end example

Enter:

@example
@code{ipe}
@end example

@item
Or, if you've enabled the ``Pairs'' menu, select the:

@example
- Edit >
  ...
  - Pairs >
    ...
    - Options
@end example

menu option
@end itemize

Customize the @command{ipe} package according to your
preferences. (@xref{Customization})

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Basic Usage
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Basic Usage
@cindex Basic Usage

The functionality supplied by the @command{ipe} package can be
accessed in two main ways: using the @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit}
command, or, using the @code{Edit} -> @code{Pairs} menu.

@menu
* Running ipe-insert-pair-edit::
* The 'Edit' -> 'Pairs' Menu::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Running ipe-insert-pair-edit
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Running @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit}
@cindex Running ipe-insert-pair-edit

@example
@key{M-(} - (Suggested Binding)
@end example

Running @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} (via a pre-configured
key-binding) (e.g. @key{M-(}) will prompt the User (using the
@emph{minibuffer}) with the string:
  
@code{Insert Pair: }

At this prompt, the User can then enter one of a set of @sc{MNEMONIC}s
(@xref{Customization}.)  The set of available @sc{MNEMONIC}s will be
visible using @emph{minibuffer} TAB completion.

TAB completion will display prompts of the form:

@example
'MNEMONIC1' - Insert Opening 'OPEN1' and Closing 'CLOSE1'
'MNEMONIC2' - Insert Opening 'OPEN2' and Closing 'CLOSE2'
'MNEMONIC3' - Insert Opening 'OPEN3' and Closing 'CLOSE3'
...
@end example

Entering a valid @sc{MNEMONIC} will then cause a @sc{PAIR} of overlays
(@xref{Display Customization}) to be added to the current buffer (at
positions around @sc{POINT}) for both the desired @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} string.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)},
and; 
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The quick brown |fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

(Where the @key{|} character represents the current position of
@sc{POINT}.)
@end itemize

Then, inserting a @sc{PAIR} using the following keystrokes:

@example
@key{M-(} @key{(}
@end example

Will add the @key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} around ``fox'', resulting in
the buffer:

@example
The quick brown (|fox) jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

(Where the @key{(} @key{)} strings are overlays that can be moved by
the @command{ipe-edit-mode} key-bindings (@xref{Basic Movement}))

The initial position of the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays will be
determined by the @emph{lexical unit} associated with the @sc{PAIR}
(either: character, word, line or list.)  This can be set when
customizing the definition of the @sc{PAIR}. (@xref{Movement Units})

Once the overlays have been initially positioned, the
@command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command will activate the
@command{ipe-edit-mode} minor-mode to allow these overlays to be
further adjusted.

@menu
* ipe-edit-mode::
* Other `ipe-insert-pair-edit-*' Commands::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node ipe-edit-mode
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection ipe-edit-mode

The @command{ipe-edit-mode} will set up a set of simple key bindings
(@xref{Basic Mode Key Bindings}) to move the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE}
overlays of the @sc{PAIR} selected by one of the
@command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} commands.  Movement is via a selected
@emph{lexical unit}, either:

@itemize @bullet
@item
``by characters''
@item
``by words''
@item
``by lines''
@item
``by lists''.
@end itemize

This ``movement mode'' can be changed. (@xref{Movement Units}.)

The @command{ipe-edit-mode} will also set up a set of simple key
bindings to either process or abort the insertion of this @sc{PAIR} of
strings into the buffer. (@xref{Inserting and Aborting})

Inserting or aborting the @sc{PAIR} will then remove all of the
@command{ipe-edit-mode} key bindings, and return the User to the
normal @strong{Emacs} mode for the given buffer.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Other `ipe-insert-pair-edit-*' Commands
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Other `ipe-insert-pair-edit-*' Commands

Prefixing the call to the @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command with
one or more of the @strong{Emacs} @command{universal-argument}
(Usually bound to @key{C-u} by default) can be used to modify the
behaviour of the @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command.

For example, if using the suggested @key{M-(} binding for
@command{ipe-insert-pair-edit}, the following keystrokes can be used
to invoke @emph{other} 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) commands:

@table @w{}
@item @key{C-u} @key{M-(}
Update an existing @sc{PAIR}. (@xref{Updating PAIRs})

(Command: @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-update})

@item @key{C-u} @key{C-u} @key{M-(}
Delete an existing @sc{PAIR}. (@xref{Deleting PAIRs})

(Command: @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-delete})

@item @key{C-u} @key{C-u} @key{C-u} @key{M-(}
Replace an existing @sc{PAIR} with a @sc{REPLACEMENT
PAIR}. (@xref{Replacing PAIRs})

(Command: @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-replace}) 
@end table

It is also possible to simply bind these _other_ commands to
different keystrokes, if the User feels so inclinded.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node The 'Edit' -> 'Pairs' Menu
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section The 'Edit' -> 'Pairs' Menu
@cindex The 'Edit' -> 'Pairs' Menu

@example
- Edit >
  ...
  - Pairs >
    - Insert PAIR >
      - 'OPEN' ... 'CLOSE'
      - ...
    - Update PAIR >
      - 'OPEN' ... 'CLOSE'
      - ...
    - Delete PAIR >
      - 'OPEN' ... 'CLOSE'
      - ...
    - Edit PAIR Definitions >
      - ...
    - Options
    - Info
    - Help
@end example

If running @strong{Emacs} in a graphical environment which supports
menus, the @command{ipe} package can add an extra @code{Pairs} menu
item to the standard @strong{Emacs} @code{Edit} menu.

The set of @sc{PAIR}s listed under the @code{Insert PAIR} /
@code{Update PAIR} / @code{Delete PAIR} sub-menus will change
dynamically based upon the current buffer's @option{major-mode}.

Selecting a menu item under @code{Insert PAIR} will insert the
selected @sc{PAIR} into the current buffer around @sc{POINT}, and
enter @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

Selecting a menu item under @code{Update PAIR} will update the
@emph{nearest} (@xref{Update Search Process}) @sc{PAIR} to @sc{POINT}
(of the given type) and enter @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

Selecting a menu item under @code{Delete PAIR} will delete the
@emph{nearest} (@xref{Update Search Process}) @sc{PAIR} to @sc{POINT}
(of the given type) and remain in the current @strong{Emacs} mode. 

@menu
* Enabling the 'Edit' -> 'Pairs' Menu::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Enabling the 'Edit' -> 'Pairs' Menu
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Enabling the 'Edit' -> 'Pairs' Menu

By default, the 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) menu item is disabled. To
enable it, set the @option{ipe-menu-support-p} option.  (Default:
@strong{nil})).

To set this option, either:

@itemize
@item
After loading the @command{ipe} package, run the following commands:

@example
M-x eval-expression RET
(customize-save-variable 'ipe-menu-support-p t) RET
@end example

@item
Or, add the following to your @command{.emacs} file (somewhere after
the @command{(require 'ipe)} statement):

@example
(setq ipe-menu-support-p t)
(ipe-menu--install)
@end example

@end itemize

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Basic Mode Key Bindings
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Basic Mode Key Bindings
@cindex Basic Mode Key Bindings

The following sections describe the basic key bindings (and associated
commands) that are active when the @command{ipe-edit-mode} is
activated. 

@menu
* Basic Movement::          Keys to move OPEN and CLOSE overlays.
* Basic Movement Options::  Alternate movement keys.
* Inserting and Aborting::  Keys to exit @command{ipe-edit-mode}.
* Movement Units::          Keys to change OPEN and CLOSE movement.
* Changing PAIRs::          Keys to change OPEN and CLOSE strings.
* Mouse Movement::          Movement enacted by mouse actions.
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Basic Movement
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Basic Movement
@cindex Basic Movement 

Once @command{ipe-edit-mode} is activated, the @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} overlays of a @sc{PAIR} can be moved about the buffer.  By
default, this is expected to be achieved using a set of @emph{twelve}
key-bindings. @emph{Six} that control the direction of movement of the
@sc{OPEN} overlay, and @emph{six} that control the direction of
movement of the @sc{CLOSE} overlay.

These basic movement key bindings can be configured using the
customization option, @option{ipe-edit-movement-keyset}, which can be
used to control which of a set of @emph{pre-canned} key bindings is
activated when @command{ipe-edit-mode} is active, or, can be used to
set up a @emph{user-defined} set of bindings.

By default, @option{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} is set to activate the
following key bindings, which are similar to those normally used for
standard @strong{Emacs} character and word movement.

@cindex Basic Movement (Modifiers)

@example
            <C-p>                            <M-p>
              ^                                ^
              |                                |
<C-a> <C-b>  OPEN  <M-f> <M-e>  <M-a> <M-b>  CLOSE  <C-f> <C-e>
              |                                |
              v                                v
            <M-n>                            <C-n>
@end example

@table @w{}
@item @key{C-a}
Move @sc{OPEN} to the 'beginning' (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-beg})
@item @key{C-p}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'up'               (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-up})
@item @key{C-b}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'backward'         (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-backward})
@item @key{M-f}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'forward'          (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-forward})
@item @key{M-n}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'down'             (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-down})
@item @key{M-e}
Move @sc{OPEN} to the 'end'       (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-end})

@item @key{M-a}
Move @sc{CLOSE} to the 'beginning' (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-beg})
@item @key{M-p}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'up'               (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-up})
@item @key{M-b}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'backward'         (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-backward})
@item @key{C-f}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'forward'          (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-forward})
@item @key{C-n}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'down'             (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-down})
@item @key{C-e}
Move @sc{CLOSE} to the 'end'       (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-end})
@end table

The amount each command moves its overlay is dependent upon the current
``movement mode'', which is controlled using the @var{ipe--movement}
variable.

By default, @var{ipe--movement} is set to @code{word}, which means that
the keys for the forward (@command{ipe-edit--open-forward} /
@command{ipe-edit--close-forward}) and backward
(@command{ipe-edit--open-backward} / @command{ipe-edit--close-backward})
commands will move the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays forward and
backward ``by words'', and, up and down ``by lines''.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Basic Movement Options
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Basic Movement Options

The set of @emph{movement} key bindings that are active within
@command{ipe-edit-mode}, can be changed using the customizable option
@option{ipe-edit-movement-keyset}.

To configure this option, run the command:

@example
@key{M-x} customize-variable @key{RET} ipe-edit-movement-keyset @key{RET}
@end example

This option allows for the definition of either one or more pre-canned
``keysets'' (@emph{Alphabetic}, @emph{Arrows}, @emph{Modifiers},
@emph{WASD}, @emph{VI}) to be toggled on and off independently, or,
for a ``user defined'' keyset to be installed.

(i.e. If using the pre-canned keyset, it is possible to activate both
the @emph{Alphabetic} and the @emph{Arrows} options, and be able to
move the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays using both the alphabetic
and arrows keys, or, the User can simply define their own preferred
movement key bindings and use those instead.)

@menu
* Basic Movement (Alphabetic)::
* Basic Movement (Arrows)::
* Basic Movement (WASD)::
* Basic Movement (VI)::
* Basic Movement (Custom)::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Basic Movement (Alphabetic)
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Alphabetic
@cindex Basic Movement (Alphabetic)

If the @option{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} option includes the
@emph{Alphabetic} flag, then, when in @command{ipe-edit-mode}, the
basic movement of the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays is controlled
by the same set of key bindings as the standard @strong{Emacs}
character movement keys, but without the keyboard modifiers.

@example
        <p>                    <P>
         ^                      ^
         |                      |
<a> <b> OPEN <F> <E>  <A> <B> CLOSE <f> <e>
         |                      |
         v                      v
        <N>                    <n>
@end example

@table @w{}
@item @key{a}
Move @sc{OPEN} to the 'beginning' (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-beg})
@item @key{p}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'up'               (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-up})
@item @key{b}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'backward'         (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-backward})
@item @key{F}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'forward'          (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-forward})
@item @key{N}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'down'             (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-down})
@item @key{E}
Move @sc{OPEN} to the 'end'       (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-end})

@item @key{A}
Move @sc{CLOSE} to the 'beginning' (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-beg})
@item @key{P}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'up'               (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-up})
@item @key{B}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'backward'         (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-backward})
@item @key{f}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'forward'          (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-forward})
@item @key{n}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'down'             (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-down})
@item @key{e}
Move @sc{CLOSE} to the 'end'       (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-end})
@end table

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Basic Movement (Arrows)
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Arrows
@cindex Basic Movement (Arrows)

If the @option{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} option includes the
@emph{Arrows} flag, then, when in @command{ipe-edit-mode}, the basic
movement of the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays is controlled by the
arrows keys (@key{up}, @key{left}, @key{right}, @key{down}), the
@key{home} and @key{end} keys, and the @key{CTRL} modifier.

@example
              <up>                                      <C-up>
               ^                                          ^
               |                                          |
<home> <left> OPEN <C-right> <C-end>  <C-home> <C-left> CLOSE <right> <end>
               |                                          |
               v                                          v
            <C-down>                                    <down>
@end example

@table @w{}
@item @key{home}
Move @sc{OPEN} to the 'beginning' (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-beg})
@item @key{up}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'up'               (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-up})
@item @key{left}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'backward'         (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-backward})
@item @key{C-right}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'forward'          (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-forward})
@item @key{C-down}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'down'             (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-down})
@item @key{C-end}
Move @sc{OPEN} to the 'end'       (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-end})

@item @key{C-home}
Move @sc{CLOSE} to the 'beginning' (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-beg})
@item @key{C-up}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'up'               (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-up})
@item @key{C-left}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'backward'         (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-backward})
@item @key{right}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'forward'          (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-forward})
@item @key{down}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'down'             (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-down})
@item @key{end}
Move @sc{CLOSE} to the 'end'       (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-end})
@end table

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Basic Movement (WASD)
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection WASD
@cindex Basic Movement (WASD)

If the @option{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} option includes the
@emph{WASD} flag, then, when in @command{ipe-edit-mode}, the basic
movement of the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays is controlled by the
(@key{q}, @key{w}, @key{a}, @key{s}, @key{d}, @key{e}) keys and their
uppercase counterparts.

@example
        <w>                    <W>
         ^                      ^
         |                      |
<q> <a> OPEN <D> <E>  <Q> <A> CLOSE <d> <e>
         |                      |
         v                      v
        <S>                    <s>
@end example

@table @w{}
@item @key{q}
Move @sc{OPEN} to the 'beginning' (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-beg})
@item @key{w}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'up'               (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-up})
@item @key{a}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'backward'         (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-backward})
@item @key{D}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'forward'          (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-forward})
@item @key{S}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'down'             (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-down})
@item @key{E}
Move @sc{OPEN} to the 'end'       (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-end})

@item @key{Q}
Move @sc{CLOSE} to the 'beginning' (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-beg})
@item @key{W}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'up'               (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-up})
@item @key{A}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'backward'         (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-backward})
@item @key{d}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'forward'          (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-forward})
@item @key{s}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'down'             (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-down})
@item @key{e}
Move @sc{CLOSE} to the 'end'       (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-end})
@end table

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Basic Movement (VI)
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection VI
@cindex Basic Movement (VI)

If the @option{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} option includes the @emph{VI}
flag, then, when in @command{ipe-edit-mode}, the basic movement of the
@sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays is controlled by the VI basic
character movement keys (@key{k}, @key{h}, @key{l}, @key{j}) and their
uppercase counterparts, plus the VI start and end of line keys
(@key{0}, @key{$}), and the VI word movement keys (@key{B} and
@key{W}) for the @command{ipe-edit--open-beg} /
@command{ipe-edit--open-end} / @command{ipe-edit--close-beg} /
@command{ipe-edit--close-end} commands.

@example
        <k>                    <K>
         ^                      ^
         |                      |
<0> <h> OPEN <L> <B>  <W> <H> CLOSE <l> <$>
         |                      |
         v                      v
        <J>                    <j>
@end example

@table @w{}
@item @key{0}
Move @sc{OPEN} to the 'beginning' (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-beg})
@item @key{k}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'up'               (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-up})
@item @key{h}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'backward'         (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-backward})
@item @key{L}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'forward'          (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-forward})
@item @key{J}
Move @sc{OPEN} 'down'             (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-down})
@item @key{B}
Move @sc{OPEN} to the 'end'       (Command: @command{ipe-edit--open-end})

@item @key{W}
Move @sc{CLOSE} to the 'beginning' (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-beg})
@item @key{K}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'up'               (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-up})
@item @key{H}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'backward'         (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-backward})
@item @key{l}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'forward'          (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-forward})
@item @key{j}
Move @sc{CLOSE} 'down'             (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-down})
@item @key{$}
Move @sc{CLOSE} to the 'end'       (Command: @command{ipe-edit--close-end})
@end table

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Basic Movement (Custom)
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Custom Movement Keyset
@cindex Basic Movement (Custom)

A ``user defined'' set of 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe)
@command{ipe-edit-mode} movement key bindings can be set using the
customization option @option{ipe-edit--custom-movement-keyset}.

To configure this option, run the command:

@example
@key{M-x} customize-variable @key{RET} ipe-edit--custom-movement-keyset @key{RET}
@end example

Or, select the @emph{'Insert Pair Edit' - Movement Keys: Custom Key
Set} option from the @code{Edit} -> @code{Pairs} menu:

@example
- Edit > 
  ... 
  - Pairs > 
    ... 
    - Options 
      ...
      * 'Insert Pair Edit' - Movement Keys: Custom Key Set 
@end example              

menu option.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Inserting and Aborting
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Inserting and Aborting
@cindex Inserting and Aborting

To exit @command{ipe-edit-mode}, the User either @emph{inserts} the
@sc{PAIR}, or @emph{aborts}.

@subsection Inserting
@key{RET} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})

Once the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays have been used to correctly
position the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings of an 'Insert Pair Edit'
(ipe) @sc{PAIR} within the buffer, they can be inserted into the
buffer using the command: @command{ipe-edit--insert-pair}.

@defun ipe-edit--insert-pair
This command will insert the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings of an
'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR} into the buffer, exit the
@command{ipe-edit-mode}, and, restore all key bindings to normal.
@end defun

Other ``Insert And...'' commands are available. (@xref{Insert And... Commands})
@subsection Aborting
@key{C-g} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})

If it is not desirable to insert the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings
represented by the overlays within @command{ipe-edit-mode}, the mode
can be aborted using the command: @command{ipe-edit--abort}.

@defun ipe-edit--abort
This command will exit the @command{ipe-edit-mode} and restore all key
bindings to normal, without inserting the @sc{OPEN} or @sc{CLOSE}
strings into the buffer.
@end defun

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Movement Units
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Movement Units
@cindex Movement Units

The @emph{default} movement unit for a given 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe)
@sc{PAIR} is ``by words'', however, each individual @sc{PAIR} can
define its own @emph{initial movement} (@xref{Customization}.)

Movement can be:

@itemize @w{}
@item
``by characters''
@item
``by words''
@item
``by lines''
@item
``by lists''
@end itemize

In addition to each @sc{PAIR} defining its own @emph{initial movement},
movement can be changed in @command{ipe-edit-mode} using the following
commands, (Bound to the @key{m} prefix in @command{ipe-edit-mode} by
default.)

@itemize @w{}
@item
@key{m} @key{c} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})

@defun ipe-edit--movement-by-char 
Changes the movement made by the @command{ipe-edit-mode} basic
movement (@xref{Basic Movement}) commands to be ``by characters''.
@end defun

@item
@key{m} @key{w} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})

@defun ipe-edit--movement-by-word
Changes the movement made by the @command{ipe-edit-mode} basic
movement (@xref{Basic Movement}) commands to be ``by words''.
@end defun

@item
@key{m} @key{l} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
@defun ipe-edit--movement-by-line
Changes the movement made by the @command{ipe-edit-mode} basic
movement (@xref{Basic Movement}) commands to be ``by lines''.
(@xref{Line Movement})
@end defun

@item
@key{m} @key{x} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})

@defun ipe-edit--movement-by-list
Changes the movement made by the @command{ipe-edit-mode} basic
movement (@xref{Basic Movement}) commands to be ``by lists''.
(@xref{List Movement})
@end defun
@end itemize

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Changing PAIRs
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Changing PAIRs
@cindex Changing PAIRs

The text to be inserted by the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays of an
'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR} can be changed on the fly.

@key{(} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})

@defun ipe-edit--change-pair
Prompts for a @sc{MNEMONIC} used to identify a @sc{PAIR} from the
@command{customize}-able @var{ipe-pairs} /
@var{ipe-mode-pairs} variables, and replaces the currently
displayed strings within the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays with
the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings for the newly identified
@sc{PAIR}. 
@end defun

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)};
and 
@item
The @key{[} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{[} @key{]}.
@end itemize

If you had originally used the keystrokes:

@example
@key{M-(} @key{(}
@end example

To insert a @key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} into the buffer, you could
change the this to a @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR} after entering
@command{ipe-edit-mode} by using the keystrokes:
                        
@example
@key{(} @key{[}
@end example

This can be especially useful when @emph{Updating} @sc{PAIR}s, as a
@sc{PAIR} with a given @sc{MNEMONIC} can be selected by using the
keystrokes: 

@example
@key{M-u} @key{M-(} @emph{MNEMONIC}
@end example

And then changed to a new @sc{PAIR} using the keystrokes:

@example
@key{(} @emph{NEW-MNEMONIC}
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Mouse Movement
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Mouse Movement
@cindex Mouse Movement

If enabled via the @option{ipe-mouse-support-p} option (Default:
@strong{t}), 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}s can be moved using
the Mouse.

@table @w{}
@item @key{mouse-1} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Left clicking on a location within the buffer, will reposition the
currently displayed @sc{OPEN} overlay to the start of the closest
@emph{lexical unit}.

(Command: @command{ipe-mouse--open})

@item @key{mouse-2} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Clicking on a location within the buffer with the @emph{mouse-2}
button, will reposition the currently displayed @sc{CLOSE} overlay to
the end of the closest @emph{lexical unit}.
 
(Command: @command{ipe-mouse--close})

@item @key{drag-mouse-1} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Selecting a @emph{region} by left clicking, and dragging the mouse
from one location to another, will position the @sc{OPEN} overlay at
the @emph{lexical unit} closest to the start of the @emph{region}, and
the @sc{CLOSE} overlay at the @emph{lexical unit} closest to the end
of the @emph{region}.

(Command: @command{ipe-mouse--region})

@item @key{wheel-up} / @key{wheel-down} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
If available, mouse wheel actions can be used to move the @sc{OPEN}
and @sc{CLOSE} overlays forward and backward.

(Commands: @command{ipe-mouse--open-backward} /
@command{ipe-mouse--close-forward})

@item @key{C-wheel-up} / @key{C-wheel-down} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Holding the @key{CTRL} key while using the mouse wheel can be used to
move the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays in the opposite directions.

(Commands: @command{ipe-mouse--open-forward} /
@command{ipe-mouse--close-backward}) 

@item @key{S-wheel-up} / @key{S-wheel-down} / @key{C-S-wheel-up} / @key{C-S-wheel-down} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Holding the @key{SHIFT} key while using the mouse wheel can be used to
move the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays using alternate
movements (i.e. ``by-char'' regardless of the current @emph{Movement
Mode})

@w{
(Commands:                                   @*
  @command{ipe-mouse--open-forward-alt} /    @*
  @command{ipe-mouse--close-backward-alt} /  @*
  @command{ipe-mouse--open-backward-alt} /   @*
  @command{ipe-mouse--close-forward-alt}     @*
)}

@item @key{M-wheel-up} / @key{M-wheel-down} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Holding the @key{META} key while using the mouse wheel can be used to
change the current ``movement mode``.

(Commands: @command{ipe-mouse--next-movement} /
@command{ipe-mouse--previous-movement})
@end table

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Other Major Commands
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Other Major Insert-Pair-Edit Commands
@cindex Other Major Insert-Pair-Edit Commands

The following sections describe the other @emph{Major} 'Insert Pair
Edit' (ipe) commands.

@menu
* Updating PAIRs::  Commands to update existing PAIRs.
* Deleting PAIRs::  Commands to delete existing PAIRs.
* Replacing PAIRs:: Commands to replace existing PAIRs.
@end menu

@node Updating PAIRs
@section Updating PAIRs
@cindex Updating PAIRs

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @emph{MNEMONIC}
@end example

The positions of existing @sc{PAIR}s within a buffer can be
@emph{updated} by using the command:

@defun ipe-insert-pair-edit-update
This command updates the position of the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE}
strings of an 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}.  The @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} strings of the @sc{PAIR} are determined by: prompting for,
and looking up, a @sc{MNEMONIC} in the @command{customize}-able
@var{ipe-pairs} / @var{ipe-mode-pairs} variables.
@end defun

Calling the @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-update} command will search
the current buffer for a @sc{PAIR} which matches the @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} strings for the given @sc{MNEMONIC}.  It will replace the
@sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings with overlays, which can then be
moved using the standard 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) commands
(@xref{Basic Movement}).

This command can be also be invoked by invoking the
`universal-argument' (Generally bound to @key{C-u}), before a call to
@command{ipe-insert-pair-edit}.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)};
@item
The @emph{Modifiers} @command{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} has been
enabled, and; 
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The quick brown (|fox) jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

(@strong{Where}: The @key{|} character is used to represent the
current position of @sc{POINT}.)
@end itemize

To update the position of the @key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} around ``fox''
you would use the keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{(}
@end example

Which will call @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-update}, select the
@key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} around ``fox'', and enter
@command{ipe-edit-mode}. 

To then move the existing parenthesis around ``fox'' to ``over'',
you would then use the keystroke:

@example
@key{M-f}
@end example

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown |fox (jumps) over the lazy dog.
@end example

To then insert the @key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} into the buffer use the
keystroke:

@example
@key{RET}
@end example

@strong{NOTE}: The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-update} command will
search for the @emph{nearest} (@xref{Update Search Process}) @sc{PAIR}
to @sc{POINT}.  The direction of the search is determined by the
option @option{ipe-update-forward-first-p}.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Deleting PAIRs
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Deleting PAIRs
@cindex Deleting PAIRs

@example
@key{C-u} @key{C-u} @key{M-(} @emph{MNEMONIC}
@end example

Existing @sc{PAIR}s within a buffer can be @emph{deleted} by using the
command: 

@defun ipe-insert-pair-edit-delete
This command deletes the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings of an
'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}.  The @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE}
strings of the @sc{PAIR} are determined by: prompting for, and looking
up, a @sc{MNEMONIC} in the @command{customize}-able @var{ipe-pairs} /
@var{ipe-mode-pairs} variables.
@end defun

Calling the @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-delete} command will search
the current buffer for a @sc{PAIR} which matches the @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} strings corresponding the given @sc{MNEMONIC}.  If a
@sc{PAIR} is found, it will delete the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE}
strings.

This command can be also be invoked by invoking the
@command{universal-argument} (Generally bound to @key{C-u}), twice
before a call to @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit}.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)},
and; 
@item 
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The quick brown (|fox) jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

(@strong{Where}: the @key{|} character is used to represent the
current position of @sc{POINT}.)
@end itemize

To delete the parenthesis around ``fox'' you would use the keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{(}
@end example

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown |fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

@sc{NOTE}: The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-delete} command will
search for the @emph{nearest} (@xref{Update Search Process}) @sc{PAIR}
to @sc{POINT}.  The direction of the search is determined by the
@option{ipe-update-forward-first-p} option.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Replacing PAIRs
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Replacing PAIRs
@cindex Replacing PAIRs

@example
@key{C-u} @key{C-u} @key{C-u} @key{M-(} @emph{MNEMONIC}
@end example

An existing @sc{PAIR} within a buffer can be @emph{replaced} with the
@sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} string of another @sc{PAIR} by using the
command:

@defun ipe-insert-pair-edit-replace
This command replaces the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings of an
'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}.  The @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE}
strings of the @sc{PAIR} to be replaced are determined by: prompting
for, and looking up, a @sc{MNEMONIC} in the @command{customize}-able
@var{ipe-pairs} / @var{ipe-mode-pairs} variables.  The @sc{PAIR}
specifying the replacement @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings is also
determined by prompting for, and looking up, a @sc{MNEMONIC} in the
@command{customize}-able @var{ipe-pairs} / @var{ipe-mode-pairs}
variables
@end defun

The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-replace} command will search the
current buffer for a @sc{PAIR} which matches the @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} strings corresponding the given @sc{MNEMONIC}.  If a
@sc{PAIR} is found, it will replace the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE}
strings with overlays containing the new @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE}
strings for the @sc{PAIR} identified by the second @sc{REPLACEMENT}
@sc{MNEMONIC}.  These new @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings can then be
moved using the standard 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) basic movement
(@xref{Basic Movement}) commands.

This command can be also be invoked by invoking the
@command{universal-argument} (Generally bound to @key{C-u}), three
times before a call to @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit}.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)};
@item
The @key{[} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{[} @key{]},
and; 
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The quick brown (|fox) jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

(@strong{Where}: The @key{|} character is used to represent the
current position of @sc{POINT}.)
@end itemize

To replace the @key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} around ``fox'' with @key{[}
@key{]}, you would use the keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{C-u} @key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{(} @key{[}
@end example

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown [|fox] jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

@sc{NOTE}: The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-replace} command will
search for the @emph{nearest} (@xref{Update Search Process}) @sc{PAIR}
to @sc{POINT}.  The direction of the search is determined by the
@option{ipe-update-forward-first-p} option.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Customization
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Customization
@cindex Customization

The set of @sc{PAIR}s that can be inserted, updated or deleted using
the @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command is controlled by the:

@itemize @w{}
@item
@var{ipe-pairs}
@item
@var{ipe-mode-pairs}
@end itemize

Variables.

These variables can be used to define several different @emph{types}
of @sc{PAIR}s (@xref{Types of PAIR Definition}.)

These variables can be edited in a number of ways:

@menu
* Types of PAIR Definition::
* Customization Using 'customize'::
* Customization Using the 'Pairs' Menu::
* Inline Customization:: 
* Display Customization::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Types of PAIR Definition
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Types of PAIR Definition
@cindex Types of PAIR Definition

There are four @emph{types} of 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}
definition: 

@itemize @w{}
@item
@sc{Basic} - A simple @sc{PAIR} definition with just an @sc{OPEN}
and @sc{CLOSE} string.
@item
@sc{Intermediate} - A more complex @sc{PAIR} definition which can
have a predefined initial movement, an @sc{INFIX} string, escapes, and
can be @emph{Auto-Inserted}.
@item
@sc{Advanced} - An even more complex @sc{PAIR} definition which
can have all of the of customization an @sc{Intermediate}
@sc{PAIR}, but with additional properties that define the position at
which @sc{POINT} is placed when a @sc{PAIR} is inserted, a custom
@emph{indentation} function, and a @emph{menu} definition.
@item
@sc{Custom Movement} - A @sc{PAIR} definition based upon a
@emph{custom movement} function.  (See: @xref{Defining Custom
'ipe--movement' Functions}) 
@end itemize

Each customization option: (Using `customize'; Using the ``Edit''
menu; or @emph{inline}) offers options to select the @emph{type} of
@sc{PAIR} that is to be @emph{added}, @emph{edited}, or
@emph{deleted}.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Customization Using 'customize'
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Customization Using 'customize'
@cindex Customization Using 'customize'

To edit the global set of 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}s using
the @strong{Emacs} @command{customize} package, run the command:

@example
@key{M-x} customize-variable @key{RET} ipe-pairs @key{RET}
@end example

This will display a @command{custom-mode} buffer in which the values
within the @var{ipe-pairs} variable can be edited using standard
@strong{Emacs} @command{customize} widgets.  These widgets can be used
to enter the four @emph{types} of @sc{PAIR}s (@xref{Types of PAIR
Definition}) (Identified by the @strong{Emacs} @command{customize} 
@sc{Value Menu}.) 

To edit a @emph{Mode-Specific} set of @sc{PAIR}s using the
@strong{Emacs} @command{customize} package, run the command:

@example
@key{M-x} customize-variable @key{RET} ipe-mode-pairs @key{RET}
@end example

This will display a @command{custom-mode} buffer in which the values
within the @var{ipe-mode-pairs} variable can be edited using standard
@strong{Emacs} @command{customize} widgets.  Each entry within the
@var{ipe-mode-pairs} variable, associates a @emph{mode} with a set of
@sc{PAIR} definitions.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Customization Using the 'Pairs' Menu
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Customization Using the 'Pairs' Menu
@cindex Customization Using the 'Pairs' Menu

@w{
- Edit >                       @*
  ...                          @*
  - Pairs >                    @*
    ...                        @*
    - Edit PAIR Definitions >  @*
      ...
}

If running in a graphical environment which supports a menu bar, (and
the @strong{Emacs} @command{menu-bar-mode} has been enabled) the
'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) package can be customized using the
@strong{Emacs} menu bar.

@strong{NOTE}: The 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) menu item is enabled using
the @option{ipe-menu-support-p} option.  (Default: @strong{nil})
(@xref{Enabling the 'Edit' -> 'Pairs' Menu})

The @code{Edit Pair Definitions >} sub-menu contains a number of
sub-menus which can be used to @emph{Add}, @emph{Modify} and
@emph{Delete} 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR} definitions.

@code{Edit Pair Definitions >} sub menus:

@table @code
@item Add PAIR Definition...
Displays a Window in which the definition of a new @emph{Global}
@sc{PAIR} can be edited using @strong{Emacs} widgets.

@item Add Mode-Specific PAIR Definition...
Prompts the user for a @var{major-mode}, and then displays a Window in
which the definition of a new @emph{Mode-Specific} @sc{PAIR} can be
edited using @strong{Emacs} widgets.

@item Edit PAIR Definition
Offers a sub-menu for each @emph{Global} @sc{PAIR}, which if selected,
displays a Window in which the definition of the selected
@emph{Global} @sc{PAIR} can be edited using @strong{Emacs} widgets.

@item Edit Mode-Specific PAIR Definition
Offers a sub-menu for each @emph{Mode-Specific} @sc{PAIR} (for the
current @option{major-mode}), which if selected, displays a Window in
which the definition of the selected @emph{Mode-Specific} @sc{PAIR}
can be edited using @strong{Emacs} widgets. (This menu will only be
enabled if there are existing @emph{Mode-Specific} @sc{PAIR}
definitions for the current buffer's @option{major-mode}.)

@item Edit MNEMONIC Definition...
Prompts the User for an @sc{MNEMONIC} for an existing @emph{Global}
@sc{PAIR} (using the @emph{minibuffer}), then prompts the User for a
@sc{REPLACEMENT} mnemonic, and then changes the @sc{MNEMONIC} for the
given @emph{Global} @sc{PAIR} to the given @sc{REPLACEMENT}
@sc{MNEMONIC}. 

@item Edit Mode-Specific MNEMONIC Definition...
Prompts the User for an @sc{MNEMONIC} for an existing
@emph{Mode-Specific} @sc{PAIR} (using the @emph{minibuffer}), then
prompts the User for a @sc{REPLACEMENT} @sc{MNEMONIC}, and then
changes the @sc{MNEMONIC} for the given @emph{Mode-Specific} @sc{PAIR}
to the given @sc{REPLACEMENT} mnemonic.  (This menu will only be
enabled if there are existing @emph{Mode-Specific} @sc{PAIR}
definitions for the current buffer's @option{major-mode}.)

@item Delete PAIR Definition
Offers a sub-menu for each @emph{Global} @sc{PAIR}, which if selected,
deletes the given @emph{Global} @sc{PAIR}.

@item Delete Mode-Specific PAIR Definition
Offers a sub-menu for each @emph{Mode-Specific} @sc{PAIR} (for the
current @option{major-mode}), which if selected, deletes the given
@emph{Mode-Specific} @sc{PAIR} from the current mode.  (This menu will
only be enabled if there are existing @emph{Mode-Specific} @sc{PAIR}
definitions for the current buffer's @option{major-mode}.)

@item Delete PAIR Definition...
Prompts the User for a @sc{MNEMONIC} for an existing @emph{Global}
@sc{PAIR} (using the @emph{minibuffer}), and then deletes the selected
@emph{Global} @sc{PAIR} definition from the @var{ipe-pairs} variable.

@item Delete Mode-Specific PAIR Definition...
Prompts the User for a @command{major-mode} and a @sc{MNEMONIC} for an
existing @emph{Mode-Specific} @sc{PAIR} (using the @emph{minibuffer}),
and then deletes the selected @emph{Mode-Specific} @sc{PAIR} from the
@var{ipe-mode-pairs} variable.
@end table

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Inline Customization
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Inline Customization
@cindex Inline Customization

'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR} definitions can also be added /
updated or deleted @emph{inline}, by using key bindings which execute
customization commands from within the @command{ipe} @emph{minibuffer}
prompt, or when within the @command{ipe-edit-mode} itself.

Bindings are supplied for the following commands:

@table @w
@item @key{C-+} (at the ``Insert Pair: '' prompt or in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Prompts the User (using the @command{minibuffer}) to create a new
'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR} definition for a given
@sc{MNEMONIC}.

(Command: @command{ipe-defn--edit-pair})

@item @key{M-+} (at the ``Insert Pair: '' prompt or in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Prompts the User (using the @command{minibuffer}) to create a new
@emph{Mode-Specific} 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR} definition for
a given @sc{MNEMONIC}.

(Command: @command{ipe-defn--edit-mode-pair})

@item @key{C-%} (at the ``Insert Pair: '' prompt or in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Prompts the User (using the @command{minibuffer}) to change the
@sc{MNEMONIC} for an existing 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}.

(Command: @command{ipe-defn--change-pair-mnemonic})

@item @key{M-%} (at the ``Insert Pair: '' prompt or in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Prompts the User (using the @command{minibuffer}) to change the
@sc{MNEMONIC} for an existing @emph{Mode-Specific} 'Insert Pair Edit'
(ipe) @sc{PAIR}.

(Command: @command{ipe-defn--change-mode-pair-mnemonic})

@item @key{C-*} (at the ``Insert Pair: '' prompt or in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Prompts the User (using the @command{minibuffer}) to delete an
existing 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}.

(Command: @command{ipe-defn--delete-pair})

@item @key{M-*} (at the ``Insert Pair: '' prompt or in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Prompts the User (using the @command{minibuffer}) to delete an
existing @emph{Mode-Specific} 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}.

(Command: @command{ipe-defn--delete-mode-pair})
@end table

@menu
* Inline Customization Prompts::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Inline Customization Prompts
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Inline Customization Prompts

When creating a new 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR} (or editing an
existing @sc{PAIR}) using the @emph{Inline Customization} commands, the
User will be prompted to enter the following information (using the
@command{minibuffer}):

@table @code
@item Create new 'Insert Pair Edit' PAIR for - MNEMONIC:
At this prompt, enter the (generally single character) @sc{MNEMONIC}
that will be used at the ``Insert Pair: '' prompt
to identify the @sc{PAIR}. (@xref{Running ipe-insert-pair-edit}) 

@item OPEN:
At this prompt, enter the @sc{OPEN} string of the 'Insert Pair Edit'
(ipe) @sc{PAIR} to be associated with the given @sc{MNEMONIC}.

@item CLOSE:
At this prompt, enter the @sc{CLOSE} string of the 'Insert Pair Edit'
(ipe) @sc{PAIR} to be associated with the given @sc{MNEMONIC}.

@item Set 'Intermediate' options?
At this prompt, enter a @code{y} / @code{n} answer.  Entering @code{n}
will complete the @sc{PAIR} definition and exit the
@command{minibuffer}.

@item Movement:
At this prompt, enter either:

@itemize @bullet
@item characters
@item words
@item lines
@item lists
@end itemize

This will define the @emph{Initial Movement} (@xref{Movement Units})
of the @sc{PAIR} to be associated with the given @sc{MNEMONIC}.

@item INFIX:
If the @code{Movement:} is set to @code{lines}, the User will be
prompted to enter an (optional) @command{INFIX}.  (@xref{Defining line
PAIRs with an INFIX}.)  This may be left blank if no @command{INFIX} is
desired for the @sc{PAIR} to be associated with @sc{MNEMONIC}.

@item Include Escapes?
At this prompt, enter a @code{y} / @code{n} answer.  Entering @code{y}
will prompt the User to enter a list of @sc{ESCAPE} / @sc{REPLACEMENT}
strings for the @sc{PAIR} to be associated with
@sc{MNEMONIC}. (@xref{Escaping Text within a PAIR}.) This may be left
blank if no @command{ESCAPEs} are desired for the @sc{PAIR} to be
associated associated with @sc{MNEMONIC}.

@item Escape Match Text:
If the @code{Include Escapes?} is set to @code{y}, the @code{Escape
Match Text:} prompt will be displayed.  At this prompt, enter 
@sc{ESCAPE} text.  Matches to this substring found between the
@sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings will be replaced with the text
entered at the next prompt.  (To ignore escaping completely, or to
exit the @code{Escape Match Text} input after entering multiple
@sc{ESCAPE} / @sc{REPLACEMENT} strings, leave this prompt blank and
press @key{RET}.)

@item Escape Replacement Text:
If the @code{Include Escapes?} is set to @code{y}, the @code{Escape
Replacement Text:} prompt will be displayed after entering an ESCAPE
within the @code{Escape Match Text} prompt.  At this prompt, enter the
@sc{REPLACEMENT} text corresponding to the @sc{ESCAPE} text entered
at the previous prompt.  Matches to the @sc{ESCAPE} text found between
the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings will be replaced with this text.
After entering the @sc{REPLACEMENT} string, the User will be returned
to the @code{Escape Match Text:} prompt to enter further @sc{ESCAPEs}.

@item Auto-Insert?
At this prompt, enter a @code{y} / @code{n} answer.  Entering @code{y}
will indicate that when this @sc{PAIR} is selected using the
``Insert Pair: '' prompt, the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings
will be instantly inserted into the buffer without entering
@command{ipe-edit-mode}. (@xref{Auto Insertion})

@item Set 'Advanced' options?
At this prompt, enter a @code{y} / @code{n} answer.  Entering @code{n}
will complete the @sc{PAIR} definition and exit the
@command{minibuffer}.

@item Move Point on Insert:
At this prompt, enter either:

@itemize @bullet
@item close-beg
@item close-end
@item open-beg
@item open-end
@item resume
@end itemize

This will define the position at which @sc{POINT} is set when the
@sc{PAIR} is inserted into the buffer (@xref{Positioning POINT and
MARK}.)

@item Indent Function:
At this prompt, enter either:

@itemize @bullet
@item none
@item current
@item previous
@end itemize

Indicating the position at which to indent the @sc{PAIR} / intervening
text for @sc{PAIRs} with an @emph{Initial Movement} of ``by lines''.

@item Menu:
At this prompt, enter a string indicating the location of the newly
defined @sc{PAIR} within the various 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe)
@code{Pairs -> Edit} sub-menus.  Setting this option will cause the
@sc{PAIR} definition to appear within sub-menus under the 'Insert Pair
Edit' sub-menus.  (Futher sub-menus can be defined by using a ``/''
character as a separator within this menu string.)  If left blank, the
@sc{PAIR} will appear at the root of the 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe)
sub-menus along with the other @emph{Global} @sc{PAIRs}.
@end table

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Display Customization
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Display Customization

The fonts and colours used by the overlays that display the position
of the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings in @command{ipe-edit-mode} can
be customized by:

Using @command{customize-face} command for the following
@strong{Emacs} @emph{faces}:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@var{ipe-open-highlight}  - The face used by @sc{OPEN} overlay.

It can be @command{customize}'d by running the command:

@example
@key{M-x} customize-face @key{RET} ipe-open-highlight @key{RET}
@end example

(By default, the @sc{OPEN} overlay will be displayed using the
@var{highlight} face.)

@item
@var{ipe-close-highlight}  - The face used by the @sc{CLOSE} overlay. 

It can be @command{customize}'d by running the command:

@example
@key{M-x} customize-face @key{RET} ipe-close-highlight @key{RET}
@end example

(By default, the @sc{CLOSE} overlay will be displayed using the
@var{show-paren-match} face.)
@end itemize

Or by using the @strong{Emacs} menu option:
@w{           @*
              @*
- Edit >      @*
  ...         @*
  - Pairs >   @*
    ...       @*
    - Options
}

And selecting @code{'Insert Pair Edit' - Display Options};

Other faces used by the @command{ipe-edit-mode} are:
      
@itemize @bullet
@item
@var{ipe-escape-highlight} - The face used by the @sc{ESCAPE}
overlays.

(@xref{Escaping Text within a PAIR})

@item
@var{ipe-highlight-infix} - The Face used by the @sc{INFIX} overlays.

(@xref{Defining line PAIRs with an INFIX}) 

@item
@var{ipe-empty-pair-highlight} - The face used to highlight EMPTY
@sc{OPEN} / @sc{CLOSE} string positions.

(@xref{PAIRs With Empty OPEN / CLOSE})
@end itemize

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Other ipe-edit-mode Commands
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Other ipe-edit-mode Commands
@cindex Other ipe-edit-mode Commands

The following sections describe some of the other commands /
key-bindings available within @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

@menu
* Insert And... Commands::
* Edit CONTENTS Commands::
* Next / Previous Commands::
* Multiple PAIRs Commands::
* Escaping Text within a PAIR::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Insert And... Commands
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Insert And... Commands

When in @command{ipe-edit-mode}, to perform an action on insert of a
@sc{PAIR} (@xref{Inserting and Aborting}), the following
keystrokes / commands can be used:

@table @w
@item @key{O} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Insert the current @sc{PAIR} at the given location and move
@sc{POINT} to the start of the @sc{OPEN} string. (Ignoring the
@emph{per-@sc{PAIR}} and default @code{ipe-set-mark-on-insert}
settings.) 

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--ia-goto-open})

@item @key{C} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Insert the current @sc{PAIR} at the given location and move
@sc{POINT} to the start of the @sc{CLOSE} string.  (Ignoring the
@emph{per-@sc{PAIR}} and default @code{ipe-set-mark-on-insert}
settings.) 

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--ia-goto-close})

@item @key{U} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Insert the current @sc{PAIR} at the given location and leave
@sc{POINT} at its original location (Ignoring the @emph{per-@sc{PAIR}}
and default @code{ipe-set-mark-on-insert} settings.)

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--ia-resume})

@item @key{Y} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Insert the current @sc{PAIR} and copy the text between the @sc{OPEN}
and @sc{CLOSE} strings to the @emph{kill-ring}.

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--ia-copy-text})

@item @key{K} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Insert the current @sc{PAIR} and kill the text between the @sc{OPEN}
and @sc{CLOSE} strings.

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--ia-kill-text})
@end table

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Edit CONTENTS Commands
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Edit CONTENTS Commands

When in @command{ipe-edit-mode}, to edit the @emph{text} between the
@sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays (without exiting
@command{ipe-edit-mode}), the following keystrokes / commands can be
used:

@table @w
@item @key{C-k} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Kill the text between the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays, and
remain in @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--contents-kill})

@item @key{M-w} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Copy the text between the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays to the
@strong{Emacs} @emph{kill-ring}, and remain in
@command{ipe-edit-mode}.

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--contents-copy})

@item @key{C-y} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Paste the last killed text between the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE}
overlays (replacing the existing text), and remain in
@command{ipe-edit-mode}. 

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--contents-yank})

@item @key{%} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Prompt the User for replacement text, and replace the text between the
@sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays with the text entered by the User.

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--contents-replace})

@item @key{C-SPC} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Remove whitespace around the text between the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE}
overlays, and remain in @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--contents-trim})

@item @key{M-u} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Convert the text between the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays to
uppercase, and remain in @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--contents-upcase})

@item @key{M-c} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Capitalize the text between the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays,
and remain in @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

(Command: (@command{ipe-edit--contents-capitalize}))

@item @key{M-l} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Convert the text between the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays to
lowercase, and remain in @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

(Command: (@command{ipe-edit--contents-downcase}))
@end table

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Next / Previous Commands
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Next / Previous Commands

@menu
* Next / Previous PAIRs::
* Next / Previous CONTENTS::
* Next / Previous OPEN / CLOSE::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Next / Previous PAIRs
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Next / Previous PAIRs

To search for the next or previous @sc{PAIR} (while in
@command{ipe-edit-mode}) use the commands: 

@itemize @bullet

@item @key{C-r} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--update-previous-pair})

@item @key{C-s} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--update-next-pair})
@end itemize

These commands will search for the @emph{next} or @emph{previous}
@sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} string, and, if found, insert the current
@sc{PAIR}; create a new @sc{PAIR} of overlays over the next / previous
@sc{PAIR}, and; remain in @command{ipe-edit-mode}, allowing the User
to continue editing the new @sc{PAIR}.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)},
and; 
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The (quick) brown (|fox) jumps (over) the lazy dog.
@end example

(Where the @key{|} character represents the current position of 
@sc{POINT}.)
@end itemize

Then, updating a @sc{PAIR} using the following keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{(}
@end example

Will enter @command{ipe-edit-mode} and edit the @key{(} @key{)}
@sc{PAIR} around ``fox''. 

Searching forward using the keystroke:

@example
@key{C-s}
@end example

Will edit the @key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} around ``over''.

Searching backward using the keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-r} @key{C-r}
@end example

Will edit the @key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} around ``quick''.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Next / Previous CONTENTS
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Next / Previous CONTENTS

To create a new @sc{PAIR} around text which matches the @sc{CONTENTS}
contained between the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings of an 'Insert
Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR} (while in @command{ipe-edit-mode}) use the
commands:

@itemize @bullet

@item @key{M-r} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--update-previous-contents})

@item @key{M-s} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--update-next-contents})
@end itemize

These commands will search for the @emph{next} or @emph{previous}
piece of text which matches the text currently contained between the
selected @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings, and, if found, insert the
current @sc{PAIR}; create a new @sc{PAIR} of overlays around the next
/ previous piece of text, and; remain in @command{ipe-edit-mode},
allowing the User to continue editing the new @sc{PAIR}.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)},
and; 
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The Quick Brown Fox |Jumps Over (The) Lazy Dog.
@end example

(Where the @key{|} character represents the current position of 
@sc{POINT}.)
@end itemize

Then, updating a @sc{PAIR} using the following keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{(}
@end example

Will enter @command{ipe-edit-mode} and edit the @key{(} @key{)}
@sc{PAIR} around the second ``The''. 

Searching backward for the text ``The'' using the keystroke:

@example
@key{M-r}
@end example

Will insert the brackets around the second ``The'', and add a new
@key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} around the first ``The''. 

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
(The) Quick Brown Fox |Jumps Over (The) Lazy Dog.
@end example
 
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Next / Previous OPEN / CLOSE
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Next / Previous OPEN / CLOSE

To change the matched location of either the @sc{OPEN} or @sc{CLOSE}
string of an 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR} @emph{individually}
(while in @command{ipe-edit-mode}) use the commands:

@itemize @bullet
@item @key{C-<} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--update-previous-open})

@item @key{M->} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--update-next-open})

@item @key{M-<} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--update-previous-close})

@item @key{C->} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--update-next-close})
@end itemize

These commands will search for the @emph{next} or @emph{previous}
@sc{OPEN} or @sc{CLOSE} string of an 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe)
@sc{PAIR}, and, if found, insert just the current @sc{OPEN} or
@sc{CLOSE} string (without inserting its corresponding partner.)  The
command will then create a new overlay over the next / previous
@sc{OPEN} or @sc{CLOSE} and remain in @command{ipe-edit-mode},
allowing the User to continue editing the new @sc{PAIR}.

@strong{NOTE}: Searches for @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings will be
bounded by their corresponding partner string.  It will not be
possible to select a @sc{CLOSE} before the currently selected
@sc{OPEN}, or to select an @sc{OPEN} after the currently selected
@sc{CLOSE}.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)},
and; 
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The (quick) brown (|fox) jumps (over) the lazy dog.
@end example

(Where the @key{|} character represents the current position of
@sc{POINT}.)
@end itemize

Then, updating a @sc{PAIR} using the following keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{(}
@end example

Will enter @command{ipe-edit-mode} and edit the @key{(} @key{)}
@sc{PAIR} around ``fox''. 

Searching forward for the next @sc{CLOSE} using the keystroke:

@example
@key{C->}
@end example

Will edit the @key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} around ``fox jumps over''.

Searching backward for the previous @sc{OPEN} using the keystroke:

@example
@key{C-<}
@end example

Will edit the @key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} around ``quick brown fox jumps
over''.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Multiple PAIRs Commands
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Multiple PAIRs Commands

When in @command{ipe-edit-mode}, it is possible to edit multiple
@sc{PAIR}s at once.  All basic @command{ipe-edit-mode} movement
commands (@xref{Basic Movement}) will operate on all active
@sc{PAIR}s, and all commands which edit the @sc{CONTENTS} of a
@sc{PAIR} (@xref{Edit CONTENTS Commands}), will also operate
on the @sc{CONTENTS} all active @sc{PAIR}s.

Adding / removing multiple @sc{PAIR}s can be done in a number of
different ways:

@menu
* Adding Multiple PAIRs Using the Emacs Region::
* Adding Multiple PAIRs Using insert-pair-edit::
* Adding Multiple PAIRs Using Existing OPEN / CLOSE::
* Adding Multiple PAIRs Using PAIR CONTENT::
* Adding Multiple PAIRs Using the Mouse::
* Removing PAIRs::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Adding Multiple PAIRs Using the Emacs Region
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Adding Multiple PAIRs Using the Emacs Region

If the @strong{Emacs} @emph{region} is @emph{active} when running one
of the 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) commands:

@itemize @bullet
@item @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-update}
@item @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-replace}
@end itemize

These commands will operate upon all @sc{PAIR}s found within the
@emph{region}.  @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays will be created for
each @sc{PAIR} found within the active @strong{Emacs} @emph{region}.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @emph{Modifiers} @command{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} has been
enabled; 
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)},
and; 
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
|The (quick) brown (fox) jumps (over) the lazy dog.@@
@end example

(Where the @key{|} character represents the current position of
@sc{POINT}, and the @key{@@} character represents the current position
of @sc{MARK} for an active @strong{Emacs} @emph{region}.)
@end itemize

Then, updating the set of @sc{PAIR}s using the following keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{(}
@end example

Will enter @command{ipe-edit-mode} and edit all three of the
@key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR}s (around ``quick'', ``fox'' and ``over''):

Moving the @sc{PAIR}s forward one word using the following keystroke:

@example
@key{M-f}
@end example

Which will result in the buffer:

@example 
|The quick (brown) fox (jumps) over (the) lazy dog.@@
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Adding Multiple PAIRs Using insert-pair-edit
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Adding Multiple PAIRs Using insert-pair-edit

The simplest way to add additional 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}s
when already in @command{ipe-edit-mode} is to re-run the
@command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command.  When already in
@command{ipe-edit-mode} mode, re-running
@command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} will insert another @sc{PAIR} (with the
same @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings as the active @sc{PAIR}) at
@sc{POINT}.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @emph{Modifiers} @command{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} has been
enabled; 
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)},
and; 
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The quick brown (|fox) jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

(Where the @key{|} character represents the current position of
@sc{POINT}.)
@end itemize

Then, updating a @sc{PAIR} using the following keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{(}
@end example

Will enter @command{ipe-edit-mode} and edit the @key{(} @key{)}
@sc{PAIR} around ``fox''. 

Moving the @sc{PAIR} forward two words using the following keystrokes:

@example
@key{M-f} @key{M-f}
@end example

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown |fox jumps (over) the lazy dog.
@end example

And then running @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} again (without exiting
@command{ipe-edit-mode}), using the keystroke:

@example
@key{M-(}
@end example

Will add a second @sc{PAIR} around ``fox'':

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown (|fox) jumps (over) the lazy dog.
@end example

Both of which can be moved one word forward using the keystroke:

@example
@key{M-f}
@end example

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown |fox (jumps) over (the) lazy dog.
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Adding Multiple PAIRs Using Existing OPEN / CLOSE
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Adding Multiple PAIRs Using Existing OPEN / CLOSE

Additional 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}s from can be added
within @command{ipe-edit-mode} by searching the buffer for existing
text which matches the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings of the
currently active @sc{PAIR}.  This can be useful when @emph{marking up}
a common set of existing @sc{PAIR}s.

Keystrokes / commands are supplied in @command{ipe-edit-mode} to:

@table @w
@item @key{s} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Search forward (from the end of the current @sc{CLOSE} overlay) for
matches to the current @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings, and, if they
exist, delete them from the buffer and replace them with a new 'Insert
Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}.

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--add-next-pair})

@item @key{r} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Search backward (from the start of the current @sc{OPEN} overlay) for
matches to the current @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings, and, if they
exist, delete them from the buffer and replace them with a new
'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}.

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--add-previous-pair})
@end table

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @emph{Modifiers} @command{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} has been
enabled; 
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)};
@item
The @key{[} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{[} @key{]},
and; 
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The (quick) brown (|fox) jumps (over) the lazy dog.
@end example

(Where the @key{|} character represents the current position of
@sc{POINT}.)
@end itemize

Then, updating a @sc{PAIR} using the following keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{(}
@end example

Will enter @command{ipe-edit-mode} and edit the @key{(} @key{)}
@sc{PAIR} around the ``fox''.

Searching forward for another @key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} can be
achieved using the following keystroke:

@example
@key{s} 
@end example

Which will result in the @sc{PAIR} around ``over'' being added as a
second 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}.

Searching backward for another @key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} can be
achieved using the following keystroke:

@example
@key{r} 
@end example

Which will result in the @sc{PAIR} around ``quick'' being added as a
third 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}.

These three @sc{PAIR}s can then be edited as one by the
@command{ipe-edit-mode} commands.

For example, to change all of the @sc{PAIR}s from
@key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR}s, to @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR}s, you would
enter the keystrokes:

@example
@key{(} @key{[}
@end example

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The [quick] brown [|fox] jumps [over] the lazy dog.
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Adding Multiple PAIRs Using PAIR CONTENT
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Adding Multiple PAIRs Using PAIR CONTENT

Additional 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}s can be added
within @command{ipe-edit-mode} by searching the buffer for existing
text which matches the text between @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings
of the currently active @sc{PAIR}.  This can be useful when
@emph{marking up} the same word / phrase with a common @sc{PAIR}.

Keystrokes / commands are supplied in @command{ipe-edit-mode} to:

@table @w
@item @key{S} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Search forward (from the end of the current @sc{CLOSE} overlay) for
matches to the text between the current @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE}
strings, and, if it exists, add a new 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe)
@sc{PAIR} around the text.

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--add-next-contents})

@item @key{R} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Search backward (from the start of the current @sc{OPEN} overlay) for
matches to the text between the current @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE}
strings, and, if it exists, add a new 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe)
@sc{PAIR} around the text.

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--add-previous-contents})
@end table

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @emph{Modifiers} @command{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} has been
enabled; 
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)};
@item
The @key{[} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{[} @key{]},
and; 
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown (|fox) jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

(Where the @key{|} character represents the current position of
@sc{POINT}.)
@end itemize

Then, updating a @sc{PAIR} using the following keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{(}
@end example

Will enter @command{ipe-edit-mode} and edit the @key{(} @key{)}
@sc{PAIR} around the middle ``fox''.

Searching forward for another match to the string ``fox'' can be
achieved using the following keystroke:

@example
@key{S} 
@end example

Which will result in a new @sc{PAIR} being added around ``fox''  on
the third line.

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown (|fox) jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown (fox) jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

Searching backward for another ``fox'' string can be achieved using
the following keystroke:

@example
@key{R} 
@end example

Which will result in a new @sc{PAIR} being added around ``fox'' on the
first line.

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown (fox) jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown (|fox) jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown (fox) jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

These three @sc{PAIR}s can then be edited as one by the
@command{ipe-edit-mode} commands.

For example, To change all of the @sc{PAIR}s from @key{(} @key{)}
@sc{PAIR}s, to @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR}s, use the following
keystrokes:

@example
@key{(} @key{[}
@end example

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown [fox] jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown [|fox] jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown [fox] jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Adding Multiple PAIRs Using the Mouse
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Adding Multiple PAIRs Using the Mouse

Additional 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}s can be added within
@command{ipe-edit-mode} using mouse clicks.  This can be useful when
@emph{marking up} lots of different text with a common @sc{PAIR} in a
graphical environment.

Bindings are supplied in @command{ipe-edit-mode} to:

@table @w
@item @key{C-mouse-1} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Add a @sc{PAIR} around the appropriate @emph{lexical unit} closest to
the position at which the mouse is clicked.

(Command: @command{ipe-mouse--add-pair})

@item @key{C-drag-mouse-1} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Add a @sc{PAIR} around the appropriate @emph{lexical units} closest to
the region specified by a mouse drag.  (i.e. The @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} overlays will be placed at the start and end of the region
given by the closest lexical unit positions to the points at which the
mouse was first clicked and at which the mouse was released.)

(Command: @command{ipe-mouse--add-pair-region})
@end table

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-menu-support-p} option has been enabled;
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)},
and;
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The quick brown (|fox) jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

(Where the @key{|} character represents the current position of
@sc{POINT}.)
@end itemize

Then, updating a @sc{PAIR} from the:

@example
- Edit >
  - Pairs >
    - Update PAIR >
      - ( ... )
@end example

Menu item.

Will enter @command{ipe-edit-mode} and edit the @key{(} @key{)}
@sc{PAIR} around ``fox''.

Holding the @key{CTRL} key and clicking on the ``i'' within the word
``quick'' with the @command{mouse-1} button, will add another
@sc{PAIR} around ``quick''.

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The (quick) brown (|fox) jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

Holding the @key{CTRL} key and dragging the mouse from the ``o'' at
the start of the word ``over'' to the ``y'' at the end of ``lazy''
with the @command{mouse-1} button, will add a third @sc{PAIR} around
``over the lazy''.

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The (quick) brown (|fox) jumps (over the lazy) dog.
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Removing PAIRs
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Removing PAIRs

To remove a @sc{PAIR} when using @command{ipe-edit-mode} to edit
multiple @sc{PAIR}s at once, the following keystrokes / commands are
supplied:

@table @w
@item @key{M-d} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Remove the first 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE}
overlay.  If there are no remaining @sc{PAIR}s after the first
@sc{PAIR} has been removed, it will exit @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--delete-first-pair})

@item @key{C-d} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Remove all 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays.
As there will be no remaining @sc{PAIR}s after all of the @sc{PAIR}s
have been removed, exit @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--delete-all-pairs})

@item @key{DEL} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Remove the last 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE}
overlay.  If there are no remaining @sc{PAIR}s after the last
@sc{PAIR} has been removed, it will exit @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

(Command: @command{ipe-edit--delete-last-pair})

@item @key{C-mouse-2} (in @command{ipe-edit-mode})
Remove the @emph{nearest} 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} overlay to the point at which the mouse is clicked.  If
there are no remaining @sc{PAIR}s after the last @sc{PAIR} has been
removed, it will exit @command{ipe-edit-mode}.
@end table

@strong{NOTE}: Unmodified mouse click / drag commands (@xref{Mouse
Movement}) will always remove all but one @sc{PAIR}.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Escaping Text within a PAIR
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Escaping Text within a PAIR

@emph{Intermediate} and @emph{Advanced} (@xref{Types of PAIR
Definition}) 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}s can define
@sc{ESCAPE} strings.

When present between an @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlay within
@command{ipe-edit-mode}, @sc{ESCAPE} strings will be @emph{replaced}
with overlays displaying a @sc{REPLACEMENT} string.  These
@sc{REPLACEMENT} strings will also be inserted into the buffer if the
@sc{PAIR} is inserted into the buffer using the
@command{ipe-edit--insert-pair} command.

This can be useful when using the 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) library to
insert @sc{PAIR}s of ``quotes''.

@sc{REPLACEMENT} strings will be displayed using the
@var{ipe-escape-highlight} face.

For example, if an 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR} was defined with:

@itemize @bullet
@item
A @sc{MNEMONIC} @key{'};
@item
@key{'} as its @sc{OPEN} string, and;
@item
@key{'} as its @sc{CLOSE} string.
@end itemize

The User could define an @sc{ESCAPE} for the @sc{PAIR} which replaced
internal @key{'} strings between the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} string
with @key{\'} (backslash + quote) strings, thus allowing internal
quote strings to be distinguished from the outer @sc{PAIR} of quotes.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the suggested
@key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @emph{Modifiers} @command{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} has been
enabled; 
@item
The @key{'} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{'} @key{'};
@item
The @emph{ESCAPES} for the @key{'} @sc{MNEMONIC} have been defined
as:

@w{         @*
    ' -> \' @*
    \ -> \\ @*
}

and;
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The quick brown '|fox' jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

(Where the @key{|} character represents the current position of 
@sc{POINT}.)
@end itemize

Then, inserting a @sc{PAIR} using the following keystrokes:

@example
@key{M-(} @key{'}
@end example

And then moving the @sc{OPEN} backward and the @sc{CLOSE} forward
using the following keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-b} @key{C-f}
@end example

Will position the @key{'} characters around the phrase ``brown fox
jumps'', and @sc{ESCAPE} the @key{'} characters around ``fox'', by 
replacing them with @key{\'} @sc{REPLACEMENTs}.

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick 'brown \'fox\' jumps' over the lazy dog.
@end example

@strong{NOTE}: The 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @emph{Update} commands
(@xref{Updating Existing PAIRs}) recognise @sc{ESCAPE} strings, and
adjust their matching algorithms accordingly.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Other Features
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Other Features
@cindex Other Features

The following sections describe the more advanced features (and
associated commands / key-bindings) of the 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe)
package.

@menu
* Line Movement::
* List Movement::
* Defining line PAIRs with an INFIX::
* Auto Insertion::
* Positioning POINT and MARK::
* PAIRs With Empty OPEN / CLOSE::
* Updating Existing PAIRs::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Line Movement
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Line Movement

@emph{Intermediate} and @emph{Advanced} (@xref{Types of PAIR
Definition}) 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}s can be defined with
an @emph{Initial Movement} of ``by lines''.  (The User can also change
the current movement lexical unit @emph{on-the-fly} within
@command{ipe-edit-mode} to ``by lines'' using the
@command{ipe-edit--movement-by-line} command. (@xref{Movement Units}))

The behaviour of the basic movement (@xref{Basic Movement}) commands
is modified for @sc{PAIR}s with a ``by lines'' movement type.

The @emph{up} and @emph{down} commands:

@itemize @bullet
@item @command{ipe-edit--open-up}
@item @command{ipe-edit--open-down}
@item @command{ipe-edit--close-up}
@item @command{ipe-edit--close-down}
@end itemize 

operate as per other movement modes (``by characters'', ``by words''.)

However, the other basic movement commands are re-bound to have
different behaviour:

@menu
* Line Movement - Forward / Backward::
* Line Movement - Beginning / End::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Line Movement - Forward / Backward
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Line Movement - Forward / Backward

The Forward / Backward basic movement (@xref{Basic Movement}) of
'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIRs} with an @emph{Initial Movement} of
``by lines'' is modified from the standard pattern used by the ``by
characters'' / ``by words'' movements. 

The:

@itemize @bullet
@item @command{ipe-edit--open-forward}
@item @command{ipe-edit--open-backward}
@item @command{ipe-edit--close-forward}
@item @command{ipe-edit--close-backward}
@end itemize 

commands, are re-bound so that instead of moving the @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} overlays, they are used to insert whitespace at the
beginning of each intervening line between the @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} overlays.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @emph{Modifiers} @command{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} has been
enabled; 
@item
The @key{@lbracechar{}} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR}
@key{@lbracechar{}} and @key{@rbracechar{}};
@item
The @emph{Initial Movement} for the @key{@lbracechar{}} @sc{MNEMONIC}
is ``by lines'', and;
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
@lbracechar{}
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@rbracechar{}
@end example
@end itemize

To indent the lines between the @key{@lbracechar{}} and
@key{@rbracechar{}} in the following text by two spaces you would used
the keystrokes: 

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{@lbracechar{}}
@end example

Which will edit the @key{@lbracechar{}} @key{@rbracechar{}} @sc{PAIR}
and enter @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

You would then use the keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-f} @key{C-f}
@end example

To indent the text between the @key{@lbracechar{}} @key{@rbracechar{}}
by two spaces. 

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
@lbracechar{}
  The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
  The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
  The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@rbracechar{}
@end example

To remove the indent of the text between the @key{@lbracechar{}}
@key{@rbracechar{}}, you would use the keystrokes:

@example
@key{M-b} @key{M-b}
@end example

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
@lbracechar{}
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@rbracechar{}
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Line Movement - Beginning / End
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Line Movement - Beginning / End

The Beginning / End basic movement (@xref{Basic Movement}) of
'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIRs} with an @emph{Initial Movement} of
``by lines'' is modified from the standard pattern used by the ``by
characters'' / ``by words'' movements.

The:

@itemize @bullet
@item @command{ipe-edit--open-beg}
@item @command{ipe-edit--open-end}
@item @command{ipe-edit--close-beg}
@item @command{ipe-edit--close-end}
@end itemize 

commands, are re-bound so that instead of moving the @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} overlays to beginning / end of a line, they are instead
used to @emph{toggle} the insertion of an empty line before / after
the @sc{OPEN} / @sc{CLOSE} overlay. 

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @emph{Modifiers} @command{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} has been
enabled; 
@item
The @key{@lbracechar{}} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR}
@key{@lbracechar{}} and @key{@rbracechar{}};
@item
The @emph{Initial Movement} for the @key{@lbracechar{}} @sc{MNEMONIC}
is ``by lines'', and;
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@lbracechar{}The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.@rbracechar{}
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example
@end itemize

To add extra empty lines before and after the @key{@lbracechar{}} and
@key{@rbracechar{}}, you would first use the keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{@lbracechar{}}
@end example

Which will update the existing @key{@lbracechar{}} @key{@rbracechar{}}
@sc{PAIR}, and enter @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

You would then use the keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-a}
@end example

Which will add an empty line before the @sc{OPEN} overlay.

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@lbracechar{}
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.@rbracechar{}
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

And you would then use the keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-e}
@end example

To add an empty line after the @sc{CLOSE} overlay.

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@lbracechar{}
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@rbracechar{}
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

These empty lines can be removed by the @command{ipe-edit--open-end} /
@command{ipe-edit--close-beg} commands, using the keystrokes:

@example
@key{M-a} @key{M-e}
@end example

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@lbracechar{}The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.@rbracechar{}
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node List Movement
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section List Movement

@emph{Intermediate} and @emph{Advanced} (@xref{Types of PAIR
Definition}) 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}s can be defined with
an @emph{Initial Movement} of ``by lists''.  (The User can also
change the current movement lexical unit @emph{on-the-fly} within
@command{ipe-edit-mode} to ``by lists'' using the
@command{ipe-edit--movement-by-list} command. (@xref{Movement Units}))

The behaviour of the basic movement (@xref{Basic Movement}) commands
is modified for @sc{PAIR}s with a ``by lists'' movement type.

@menu
* List Movement - Forward / Backward::
* List Movement - Up / Down::
* List Movement - Beginning / End::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node List Movement - Forward / Backward
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection List Movement - Forward / Backward

The Forward / Backward basic movement (@xref{Basic Movement}) of
'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIRs} with an @emph{Initial Movement} of
``by lists'' is modified from the standard pattern used by the ``by
characters'' / ``by words'' movements.

The:

@itemize @bullet
@item @command{ipe-edit--open-forward}
@item @command{ipe-edit--open-backward}
@item @command{ipe-edit--close-forward}
@item @command{ipe-edit--close-backward}
@end itemize 

commands, are re-bound so that instead of moving the @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} overlays forward / backward over text, they instead
move as per the @strong{Emacs} @command{forward-list} /
@command{backward-list} commands.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @emph{Modifiers} @command{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} has been
enabled; 
@item
The @key{[} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{[} @key{]};
@item
The @emph{Initial Movement} for the @key{[} @sc{MNEMONIC}
is ``by lists'', and;
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
([(a b c)](d e f)(g h i))
@end example
@end itemize

To edit the @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR}, you would enter the keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{[}
@end example

Which will edit the @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR} around ``(a b c)'', and
enter @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

Then, to move the @emph{closing} @key{]} around ``(a b c)''
@emph{forward}, you would use the keystroke:

@example
@key{C-f}
@end example

Which will move the @key{]} forward ``by list''.

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
([(a b c)(d e f)](g h i))
@end example

Then, to move the @emph{opening} square bracket around ``(a b c)(d e
f)'' @emph{forward}, you would use the keystroke:

@example
@key{M-f}
@end example

Which will move the @key{[} forward ``by list''.

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
((a b c)[(d e f)](g h i))
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node List Movement - Up / Down
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection List Movement - Up / Down

The Up / Down basic movement (@xref{Basic Movement}) of 'Insert Pair
Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIRs} with an @emph{Initial Movement} of ``by lists''
is modified from the standard pattern used by the ``by characters'' /
``by words'' movements.

The:

@itemize @bullet
@item @command{ipe-edit--open-up}
@item @command{ipe-edit--open-down}
@item @command{ipe-edit--close-up}
@item @command{ipe-edit--close-down}
@end itemize 

commands, are re-bound so that instead of moving the @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} overlays up / down lines of text, they instead
move as per the @strong{Emacs} @command{up-list} / @command{down-list}
commands.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @emph{Modifiers} @command{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} has been
enabled; 
@item
The @key{[} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{[} @key{]};
@item
The @emph{Initial Movement} for the @key{[} @sc{MNEMONIC}
is ``by lists'', and;
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
([(a b c)](d e f)(g h i))
@end example
@end itemize

To edit the @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR}, you would enter the keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{[}
@end example

Which will edit the @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR} around ``(a b c)'', and
enter @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

Then, to move the @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR} around ``(a b c)''
@emph{up}, you would use the keystroke:

@example
@key{C-p}
@end example

Which will move the @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR} up ``by list''.

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
[((a b c)(d e f)(g h i))]
@end example

Then, to move the @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR} around the entire buffer
back @emph{down}, you would use the keystroke:

@example
@key{M-n}
@end example

Which will move the @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR} down ``by list''.

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
([(a b c)(d e f)(g h i)])
@end example

To move the @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR} now around the ``(a b c)(d e
f)(g h i)'' further @emph{down}, you would used the keystroke:

@example
@key{M-n}
@end example

Which will move the @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR} down ``by list''.

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
(([a b c])(d e f)(g h i))
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node List Movement - Beginning / End
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection List Movement - Beginning / End

The Beginning / End basic movement (@xref{Basic Movement}) of 'Insert
Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIRs} with an @emph{Initial Movement} of ``by
lists'' is modified from the standard pattern used by the ``by
characters'' / ``by words'' movements.

The:

@itemize @bullet
@item @command{ipe-edit--open-beg}
@item @command{ipe-edit--open-end}
@item @command{ipe-edit--close-beg}
@item @command{ipe-edit--close-end}
@end itemize 

commands, are re-bound so that instead of moving the @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} overlays to the beginning / end of lines, they instead
move as per the @strong{Emacs} @command{beginning-of-defun} /
@command{end-of-defun} commands.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @emph{Modifiers} @command{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} has been
enabled; 
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)};
@item
The @key{[} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{[} @key{]};
@item
The @emph{Initial Movement} for the @key{[} @sc{MNEMONIC}
is ``by lists'', and;
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
((a b c)(d [e] f)(g h i))
@end example
@end itemize

To edit the @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR}, you would enter the keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{[}
@end example

Which will edit the @key{[} @key{]} around ``e'', and enter
@command{ipe-edit-mode}. 

Then, to move the @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR} around ``e'' to the
@emph{beginning}, you would use the keystroke:

@example
@key{C-a}
@end example

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
[]((a b c)(d e f)(g h i))
@end example

Then, to move the @key{[} @key{]} @sc{PAIR} to the @emph{end}, you
would use the keystroke:

@example
@key{C-e}
@end example

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
((a b c)(d e f)(g h i))[]
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Defining line PAIRs with an INFIX
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Defining line PAIRs with an INFIX

@emph{Intermediate} and @emph{Advanced} (@xref{Types of PAIR
Definition}) 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}s that are defined with
an @emph{Initial Movement} of ``by lines'' can also define an
@sc{INFIX}.

This @sc{INFIX} will be inserted at the start of each intervening line
between the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} overlays.

The @emph{indent} (@xref{Line Movement}) commands:

@itemize @bullet
@item @command{ipe-edit--open-forward}
@item @command{ipe-edit--open-backward}
@item @command{ipe-edit--close-forward}
@item @command{ipe-edit--close-backward}
@end itemize 

Can be used to add indentation both @emph{before} and @emph{after} the
@sc{INFIX}.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @emph{Modifiers} @command{ipe-edit-movement-keyset} has been
enabled; 
@item
The @key{/} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{/* } @key{
*/}; 
@item
The @emph{Initial Movement} for the @key{/} @sc{MNEMONIC} is `by
line';
@item
The @sc{INFIX} for the @key{/} @sc{PAIR} is @key{ **}, and;
@item
The current buffer contains the following text:

@example
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown |fox jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example
@end itemize

To insert and indent C-style comments around the text, you would enter
the keystrokes:

@example
@key{M-(} @key{/}
@end example

Which will insert a @code{/*} @code{*/} @sc{PAIR} around the
middle line, and enter @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
/* The quick brown |fox jumps over the lazy dog. */
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

And then, to move the @sc{OPEN} overlay up a line, and the @sc{CLOSE}
overlay down a line, you would enter the keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-n} @key{C-p}
@end example

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
/* The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
** The quick brown |fox jumps over the lazy dog.
** The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog. */
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

To then indent the comment two spaces, you would enter the keystrokes: 

@key{C-b} @key{C-b}

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
  /* The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
  ** The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
  ** The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog. */
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

And then, to indent the text after the comment two spaces, you would
enter the keystrokes: 

@example
@key{C-f} @key{C-f}
@end example

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
  /*   The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
  **   The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
  **   The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog. */
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
@end example

These actions can be reversed by the corresponding
@command{ipe-edit--open-forward} / @command{ipe-edit--close-backward}
commands:

@example
@key{M-f} @key{M-f} @key{M-b} @key{M-b}
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Auto Insertion
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Auto Insertion

@emph{Intermediate} and @emph{Advanced} (@xref{Types of PAIR
Definition}) 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}s can be defined
with an @emph{Auto-Insert} flag equal to @code{y}.

Running @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} and entering the @sc{MNEMONIC}
for a @sc{PAIR} with an @emph{Auto-Insert} equal to @code{y}, will
instantly insert the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings for the given
@sc{PAIR} without entering @command{ipe-edit-mode}.  (This can be used
to offer behaviour similar to the standard @strong{Emacs}
@command{insert-parentheses}, but for different @sc{PAIR}s.)

@sc{PAIR}s with an @emph{Auto-Insert} equal to @code{y} will still
honour the @emph{Initial Movement} @sc{PAIR} option, so inserting a
@sc{PAIR} of this type with:

@itemize
@item An @emph{Initial Movement} equal to @code{character}

Will insert a @sc{PAIR} around @sc{POINT}.

@item An @emph{Initial Movement} equal to @code{word}

Will insert a @sc{PAIR} around the nearest word.

@item An @emph{Initial Movement} equal to @code{line}

Will insert a @sc{PAIR} around the current line.
@end itemize

To @emph{edit} a @sc{PAIR} with an @emph{Auto-Insert} equal to
@code{y}, execute the command @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-update}
using the keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @emph{MNEMONIC}
@end example

After the @sc{PAIR} has been inserted.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Positioning POINT and MARK
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Positioning POINT and MARK

The position at which @sc{POINT} (the @strong{Emacs} cursor) is placed
on insert of an 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR} is controlled by:

@defopt ipe--move-point-on-insert
This option is consulted when inserting (@xref{Inserting and
Aborting}) an 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR} into the buffer.

If @strong{nil}, @sc{POINT} will remain at the position it was when
the @sc{PAIR} was first inserted.

If @strong{non-nil}, this option is expected to be one of the
following values:

@itemize @bullet
@item resume 
- @sc{POINT} will remain at its original position before the @sc{PAIR}
was inserted. 
@item open-beg 
- @sc{POINT} will be moved to the beginning of the @sc{OPEN} string.
@item open-end 
- @sc{POINT} will be moved to the end of the @sc{OPEN} string.
@item close-beg 
- @sc{POINT} will be moved to the beginning of the @sc{CLOSE} string.
@item close-end 
- @sc{POINT} will be moved to the end of the @sc{CLOSE} string.
@end itemize
@end defopt

The position at which the @strong{Emacs} @sc{MARK} is placed on insert
of a @sc{PAIR} controlled by:

@defopt ipe-set-mark-on-insert
This option is consulted when inserting (@xref{Inserting and
Aborting}) an 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR} into the buffer.

If @strong{nil}, @sc{MARK} will not be set.

If @strong{non}-nil, this option is expected to be one of the
following values:

@itemize @bullet
@item open-beg
- @sc{MARK} will be set to the beginning of the @sc{OPEN} string.
@item open-end
- @sc{MARK} will be set to the end of the @sc{OPEN} string.
@item close-beg
- @sc{MARK} will be set to the beginning of the @sc{CLOSE} string.
@item close-end
- @sc{MARK} will be set to the end of the @sc{CLOSE} string.
@end itemize
@end defopt

@emph{Advanced} (@xref{Types of PAIR Definition}) 'Insert Pair Edit'
(ipe) @sc{PAIR}s can define the position at which to place @sc{POINT}
on @emph{insert} of the @sc{PAIR} into the buffer 'per-@sc{PAIR}'.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PAIRs With Empty OPEN / CLOSE
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section PAIRs With Empty OPEN / CLOSE

'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR}s can be defined with an
@emph{empty} @sc{OPEN} or @sc{CLOSE} string.

The position of an @emph{empty} @sc{OPEN} or @sc{CLOSE} string will
still be maintained within @command{ipe-edit-mode}, and can be moved
about the buffer using the @command{ipe-edit-mode} movement keys
(@xref{Basic Movement}.)  Empty @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings can
be used to delimit operations which act upon the @sc{CONTENTS} of a
@sc{PAIR} (@xref{Edit CONTENTS Commands}.)

The position of an empty @sc{OPEN} or @sc{CLOSE} string is displayed
within @command{ipe-edit-mode} by overlays containing:

@defopt ipe-empty-open-string
(Default: @code{(})
@end defopt

@defopt ipe-empty-close-string
(Default: @code{)})
@end defopt

These overlays are highlighted using the @emph{face}:

@defopt ipe-empty-pair-highlight
(Default: @code{warning})
@end defopt

The @command{ipe-empty-open-string} / @command{ipe-empty-close-string}
strings are @emph{not} inserted into the buffer by
@command{ipe-edit--insert-pair}.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Updating Existing PAIRs
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Updating Existing PAIRs

In addition to inserting @sc{PAIR}s, the 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe)
package also offers a number of commands to @emph{update} the
@sc{PAIR}s which already exist within an @strong{Emacs} buffer.

@itemize @bullet
@item
@xref{Updating PAIRs}
@item
@xref{Deleting PAIRs}
@item
@xref{Replacing PAIRs}
@end itemize

The following sub-sections describe some of the more advanced features
of these commands, and some of the options used to update @sc{PAIRs}
when within @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

@menu
* Update Search Process::
* Update PAIR Matching::
* Updates on a Region::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Update Search Process
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Update Search Process

The @sc{PAIR}s updated by the 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) commands:

@itemize @bullet
@item @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-update} (@xref{Updating PAIRs});
@item @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-delete} (@xref{Deleting PAIRs}), and;
@item @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-replace} (@xref{Replacing PAIRs}.)
@end itemize

All locate the @sc{PAIR}s to be updated by searching for the
@emph{nearest} @sc{PAIR} (or, if the @emph{region} is active, for all
the @sc{PAIR}s within the @emph{region}.)

The direction of the search is determined by the
@option{ipe-update-forward-first-p} option.  (Default: @strong{nil})

@defopt{ipe-update-forward-first-p}

If nil, the @sc{PAIR} to be updated by any of the
@emph{ipe-insert-pair-edit-*} commands will be searched for by:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Searching backward from @sc{POINT} for an @sc{OPEN} string, then:
@item
Searching @emph{forward} from the @sc{OPEN} string for a
@emph{matching} @sc{CLOSE} string, or;
@item
If no @sc{OPEN} string is found by searching @emph{backward}, by
searching @emph{forward} from @sc{POINT} for an @sc{OPEN} string, then:
@item
Searching @emph{forward} from the @sc{OPEN} string for a
@emph{matching} @sc{CLOSE} string.
@end itemize

If non-nil, the @sc{PAIR} to be updated by the previous set of
commands will first be searched for by:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Searching @emph{forward} from @sc{POINT} for an @sc{OPEN} string, then:
@item
Searching @emph{forward} from the @sc{OPEN} string for a
@emph{matching} @sc{CLOSE} string, or;
@item
If no @sc{OPEN} string is found by searching @emph{forward}, by
searching @emph{backward} from @sc{POINT} for an @sc{OPEN} string,
then:
@item
Searching @emph{forward} from the @sc{OPEN} string for a
@emph{matching} @sc{CLOSE} string.
@end itemize
@end defopt

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Update PAIR Matching
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Update PAIR Matching

The @sc{PAIR}s selected by the 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) commands are
@emph{matched}, thus allowing the @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings of
a @sc{PAIR} to be nested.  Searching forward / backward for @sc{PAIR}s
(@xref{Update Search Process}) will attempt to match the
@emph{corresponding} @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} strings.

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)};
@item
The @key{[} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{[} @key{]},
and; 
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The (quick (|brown (fox) jumps) over) the lazy dog.
@end example

(Where the @key{|} character represents the current position of
@sc{POINT}.)
@end itemize

Then, to update the @key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} you would enter the
keystrokes: 

@example
@key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{(}
@end example

Which will match the @sc{PAIR} around the text ``brown fox jumps''.
(Because the @key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR} around ``fox'' is @emph{nested}
within the outer @sc{PAIR} around ``brown fox jumps''.)

Changing the @sc{PAIR} using the keystrokes:

@example
@key{(} @key{[}
@end example

Will result in the buffer:

@example
The (quick [|brown (fox) jumps] over) the lazy dog.
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Updates on a Region
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Updates on Region

If the @strong{Emacs} @emph{region} is active, running any of the
'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) commands:

@itemize @bullet
@item @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-update}
@item @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-delete}
@item @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit-replace}
@end itemize

Will act upon all of the @sc{PAIR}s within the @emph{region}.  This
will allow multiple @sc{PAIR}s to be edited at once.

(@xref{Multiple PAIRs Commands}.)

For example, assuming that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command has been bound to the
suggested @key{M-(} binding;
@item
The @key{(} @sc{MNEMONIC} is bound to the @sc{PAIR} @key{(} @key{)},
and; 
@item
The buffer contains the following text:

@example
The quick (brown) fox jumps (over) the lazy dog.
|The quick (brown) fox jumps (over) the lazy dog.
The quick (brown) fox jumps (over) the lazy dog.@@
@end example

(Where the @key{|} character represents the current position of
@sc{POINT}, and the @key{@@} key represents the current position of
@sc{MARK} for an active @strong{Emacs} @emph{region}.)
@end itemize

Then, deleting a @sc{PAIR} using the following keystrokes:

@example
@key{C-u} @key{C-u} @key{M-(} @key{(}
@end example

Will delete all of the @key{(} @key{)} @sc{PAIR}s between @sc{POINT}
and @sc{MARK}.

Which will result in the buffer:

@example
The quick (brown) fox jumps (over) the lazy dog.
|The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.@@
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Development
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Development
@cindex Development

@menu
* Creating 'ipe-mode-pairs' PAIRs Using Emacs Lisp::
* Binding MNEMONICs to Keys::
* Defining Custom 'ipe--movement' Functions::
* Adding 'ipe' ERTs (Emacs Regression Tests)::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Creating 'ipe-mode-pairs' PAIRs Using Emacs Lisp
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Creating 'ipe-mode-pairs' PAIRs Using Emacs Lisp

The 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) package is specifically designed to cater
for @emph{Mode-Specific} @sc{PAIR} bindings.  Several
@emph{Mode-Specific} bindings come bundled with the 'Insert Pair Edit'
(ipe) package:

@itemize @bullet
@item texinfo-mode - (@code{modes/ipe-texinfo-mode.el})
@item c-mode - (@code{modes/ipe-c-mode.el})
@item html-mode - (@code{modes/ipe-html-mode.el})
@item mhtml-mode - (@code{modes/ipe-html-mode.el})
@item markdown-mode - (@code{modes/ipe-markdown-mode.el})
@end itemize

These bindings are automatically activated whenever one of the 'Insert
Pair Edit' (ipe) commands is invoked within a buffer with the given
@option{major-mode}.

While bindings for @emph{Major Modes} can be added dynamically using
the 'Insert Pair Edit' customization options (@xref{Customization}),
they can also be added using @strong{Emacs Lisp}.  This may be a more
desirable option for Users wanting to supply 'Insert Pair Edit'
(ipe) @sc{PAIR}s for their own @strong{Emacs} @option{major-mode}.

To add new 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) @sc{PAIR} bindings for a new
@strong{Emacs} @option{major-mode} using @strong{Emacs Lisp}, use the
following functions (available from the @code{ipe-custom.el} /
@code{ipe.el} libraries.)

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{ipe-custom--pair-list-get}
@item @code{ipe-mode-pairs-add}
@end itemize

@defun ipe-custom--pair-list-get DEFN
Converts a list (@code{DEFN}) describing a set of 'Insert Pair Edit'
(ipe) @sc{PAIR}s into the format used by the @strong{Emacs}
@code{customize} widgets.

The list to be converted is expected to a list of @code{PAIR
DEFINITIONS} of the form: 

@example
  (MNEMONIC OPEN CLOSE)
or
  (MNEMONIC OPEN CLOSE (PLIST))
@end example

Where:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{MNEMONIC}
Is a string input into the minibuffer by the User after calling
@code{ipe-insert-pair-edit} to indicate which @sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE}
strings are to be inserted.
@item @code{OPEN}
Is a string placed at the beginning of a lexical unit, and
then moved by the 'Insert Pair Edit' commands.
@item @code{CLOSE}
Is a string placed at the end of a lexical unit, and then
moved by the 'Insert Pair Edit' commands.
@item @code{PLIST}
Is a property list specifying a set of optional @emph{Intermediate} /
@emph{Advanced} options that can be included to specify extra
configuration passed to @emph{specialised} movement functions. (see:
@code{ipe-move-by-movements})

Known PLIST properties are:

@example
:movement        MOVEMENT
:infix           INFIX
:escapes         ESCAPES
:auto-insert     AUTO-INSERT
:move-point      MOVE-POINT
:indent-function INDENT-FUNCTION
:menu            MENU
@end example

@itemize -
@item MOVEMENT
The initial lexical unit indicating the type of movements made by the
'Insert Pair Edit' commands. (pre-defined values: 'char, 'word, 'line,
'list; default: 'word.)
@item INFIX
A string added to the front of lines between the @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} @sc{PAIR} when @command{MOVEMENT} = 'line.
@item ESCAPES
Is a list of pairs of strings.  Each pair of strings (@sc{MATCH}
@sc{REPLACE}) represents an escape sequence.  Each @sc{MATCH} between
@sc{OPEN} and @sc{CLOSE} will be replaced by @sc{REPLACE}.
@item AUTO-INSERT
If non-nil, will cause the @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} function to
automatically insert the @sc{PAIR} without entering
@command{ipe-edit-mode}.
@item MOVE-POINT
Indicates where to move @emph{POINT} when a new @sc{PAIR} is inserted.
This is a @sc{PAIR}-specific override to the global
@var{ipe-move-point-on-insert} setting, and takes the same values
('resume, 'open-beg, 'open-end, 'close-beg, 'close-end)
@item INDENT-FUNCTION
is either @strong{nil}, or a function used to indent the @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} strings.
@item MENU
Is a forward slash ('/') separated string of the names of the menus
under which the @sc{PAIR} is displayed within the @strong{Emacs}
'Insert Pair Edit' sub-menus.
@end itemize
@end itemize
@end defun

@defun ipe-mode-pairs-add MODE DEFN
Adds a binding for the @sc{PAIR} definition list (@code{DEFN}) to the
@var{ipe-mode-pairs} variable for the given @code{MODE}.
@end defun

For example, for a fictional @code{xxx-mode}, to create a set of
@emph{Mode Specific} `ipe' @sc{PAIR} Definitions, create a new file, 
@code{ipe-xxx-mode.el}, and add the following @strong{Emacs Lisp}:

@example
;;; ipe-xxx-mode.el --- Insert Pair Edit - xxx-mode definitions

(require 'ipe-custom)
(require 'ipe)

; Create a new 'Insert Pair Edit' mode-specific PAIRs variable
; 'ipe-xxx-pairs' which maps:
;
;   o => <open> / <close>
;   - => -      / -
;   ; => ;      / ;       (with a ';' INFIX)
;
(defcustom
  ipe-xxx-pairs
  (ipe-custom--pair-list-get
  '(("o" "<open>" "<close>")
    ("-" "-"      "-"       :movement char)
    (";" ";"      ";"       :movement line :infix ";")))
  "'insert-pair-edit' customizations for 'xxx-mode'."
  :group 'ipe-mode-pairs
  :tag   "'Insert Pair Edit' - xxx-mode PAIRs"
  :link  '(function-link ipe-insert-pair-edit)
  :set   'ipe-custom-pair-list-set
  :get   'ipe-custom-pair-list-get
  :type  '(ipe-custom-pair-list
	   :tag "PAIRs used by 'insert-pair-edit' in 'xxx-mode'."))

; Activate the new 'ipe-xxx-pairs' whenever in 'xxx-mode'.
(ipe-mode-pairs-add 'xxx-mode 'ipe-xxx-pairs)

(provide 'ipe-xxx-mode)
;;; ipe-xxx-mode.el ends here
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Binding MNEMONICs to Keys
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Binding MNEMONICs to Keys

To bind an 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe) PAIR directly to the key
representing its @sc{MNEMONIC} (so that typing the @sc{MNEMONIC}
inserts the @sc{PAIR}), use the function:

@defun ipe-insert-pair-edit-cmd
@end defun

For example:

@example
(local-set-key "(" 'ipe-insert-pair-edit-cmd)
@end example

This will bind the @key{(} key to the 'Insert Pair Edit' (ipe)
@sc{MNEMONIC} @key{(}.  Typing @key{(} within a buffer where this has
been set will insert the @sc{PAIR} associated with the @key{(}
@sc{MNEMONIC}, and enter @command{ipe-edit-mode}.

If the @sc{PAIR} definition for the given @sc{MNEMONIC} has an
@emph{Auto-Insert} flag set to @code{y}, this can be used to
automatically enter matched @sc{PAIRs} every time the @sc{OPEN} key
for the @sc{PAIR} is pressed.  (Without entering
@command{ipe-edit-mode}.)

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Defining Custom 'ipe--movement' Functions
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Defining Custom 'ipe--movement Functions

The movements (@code{character}, @code{word}, @code{line},
@code{list}) supplied within @command{ipe-edit-mode} are
@emph{pluggable}.

They are defined by entries within:

@defvar ipe-move-by-movements

This is a @emph{list} of 4-tuples:

@example
(SYMBOL MOVE-BY-FUNCTION POS-SET-FUNCTION DESCRIPTION)
@end example

@itemize @bullet
@item @strong{SYMBOL} is the identifier defining the type of movement.

@item @strong{MOVE-BY-FUNCTION}

Is a function that returns the position of the @sc{OPEN} and
@sc{CLOSE} strings for a given @emph{lexical unit} movement mode.  It
should have a signature of the form:

@example
(MOVE-BY-FUNCTION DEFN N SIDE ACTION POS OTHER UNITS PUSH)
@end example

Where:

@itemize -
@item DEFN
- Is the definition of the @sc{PAIR} from @var{ipe-pairs}.
@item N
- Is the position of the @sc{PAIR} in @var{ipe--pair-pos-list}.
@item SIDE
- Is either @code{'open} or @code{'close}.
@item ACTION
- Is either @code{'init}, @code{'beg}, @code{'up}, @code{'backward},
@code{'forward}, @code{'down}, @code{'end}, or @code{'reset}.
@item POS
- Is the position from which the movement begins.
@item OTHER
- Is the position of the other member of the @sc{PAIR}.
@item UNITS
- Are the number of units to move.
@item PUSH
- Indicates that this is a @emph{push} move from the other member of
the @sc{PAIR}. 
@end itemize

It should return the position to which the given part of the @sc{PAIR}
(@code{'open} or @code{'close}) is set when the given movement command
(@code{'beg}, @code{'up}, @code{'down}, @code{'backward},
@code{'forward}, @code{'end}) is entered by the User.

If @code{POS} is nil, movement should be calculated from @code{POINT}. 

@item POS-SET-FUNCTION

Is an (optional) function that is called whenever
@command{ipe--pos-property-set} is called to perform movement specific
updates to the @command{ipe--pair-pos-list} state variable.  It should
have a signature of the form:

@example
(POS-SET-FUNCTION N)
@end example

Where:

@itemize -
@item N
Is the position of the @sc{PAIR} in @command{ipe--pair-pos-list} for
which a @command{ipe--pos-property-set} call has just been made.
@end itemize

@item DESCRIPTION
Is the text output to the echo area to describe the movement.
@end itemize
@end defvar

To create a new @emph{movement}:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Create a new @emph{move-by} function.
@item
Add a new entry to @var{ipe-move-by-movements} variable (See:
@command{ipe-move-by-install}.) 
@item
Add a new binding to the @var{ipe-edit-mode-movement-map} for new
movement mode.
@end itemize

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Adding 'ipe' ERTs (Emacs Regression Tests)
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@section Adding 'ipe' ERT (Emacs Regression Tests)

Regression tests (Using the @strong{Emacs} @sc{ERT} (@emph{Emacs
Regression Test})) package can be defined using the @sc{Emacs} macro:   

@defmac ipe-test-def-kbd NAME PARAM DOC CUSTOM SETUP BUFFER-TEXT EXPECTED KEYSTROKES &optional TEARDOWN)

Customized version of @command{ert-deftest} for ipe unit testing.

This macro will define an ERT test, which runs a set of keyboard
commands, KEYSTROKES, against the BUFFER-TEXT within a temporary
buffer, and compares the resulting text in the buffer after the
commands have been run, to the EXPECTED result.

For this test, the @command{ipe-insert-pair-edit} command will be
bound to @key{M-(}.

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{NAME}
The name of the ert test.  This will be prefixed with ipe-test--. 
@item @code{PARAM}
Placeholder - for future ERT extensibility.
@item @code{DOC}
Documentation string for the ert-deftest definition.
@item @code{CUSTOM}
List of ipe customizations for the test.
@item @code{SETUP}
Commands used to initialize the temporary test buffer.
@item @code{BUFFER-TEXT}
Starting text within the temporary buffer.
@item @code{EXPECTED}
Expected text within the temporary buffer after test completion.
@item @code{KEYSTROKES}
A string representing the keystrokes to be executed as user input
against the temporary buffer.  (This should be in a format that can be
parsed by the @command{kbd} command.)
@item @code{TEARDOWN}
Commands used to clean up the temporary test buffer.
@end itemize
@end defmac

The text within both @code{BUFFER-TEXT} and @code{EXPECTED} can
contain the characters:

@itemize
@item @key{|} - To represent the position of POINT.
@item @key{@atchar{}} - To represent the position of MARK.
@item @key{!} - To represent the position of a secondary ``multiple-cursors'' cursor.
@end itemize

@example
(setq ipe-test-xxx-options
      '((ipe-edit--movement-keysets '(modifiers))
        (ipe-pairs                  '(("(" "(" ")" (:movement char))
                                      ("[" "[" "]"))))

(ipe-test-def-kbd xxx-test ()
  "Test `ipe-insert-pair-edit'"
  ipe-test-xxx-options
  nil
  "|The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog."
  "(|)The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog."
  "M-( ( RET")
@end example

@menu
* Running 'ipe' ERTs (Emacs Regression Tests)::
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Running 'ipe' ERTs (Emacs Regression Tests)
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Running 'ipe' ERTs (Emacs Regression Tests)

To run @emph{Emacs Regression Test}s defined by the
@command{ipe-test-def-kbd} macro, the following convenience functions
are supplied:

@defun ipe-test-run

An interactive function to run an @strong{ERT} test that has prefix
@command{ipe-test--}. 

Prompt for the name of an @command{ipe-test-def} or
@command{ipe-test-def-kbd} test to be run, and run it.  The input
PATTERN is a regular expression that will match the NAMEs of the tests
to be run. 
@end defun

@defun ipe-test-run-all

An interactive function to run all of the @strong{ERT} test cases that
start with @command{ipe-test--}. 

This interactive function runs all of the tests created using the 
@command{ipe-test-def} or @command{ipe-test-def-kbd} macros.
@end defun

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Index
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@bye
